I was extremely nervous. As the teacher of my semester-long Chinese language class called my name, my heart started to race. I took a deep breath and began. I shared the story of quitting my job, deciding to move to Taiwan, meeting the woman who would become my wife, starting an online business, and living in five different countries. It was the first time I had shared my story in another language, and as I finished, a calmness swept over my body. It was the end of a three‑month period where I had felt completely alive, spending my time learning, creating, solving problems, and spending time exploring Taipei with my wife.
This would have been unimaginable to me five years earlier when I lived in New York City. I was single, spending my time at work, eating out, partying with friends, dating, and constantly plotting ways to work less or escape work altogether. I was working at a consulting firm making nearly $200,000 a year and working on projects for some of the most recognizable CEOs in the world. I was successful, and on my way to being even more successful.
This was the end result of an obsessive focus on getting ahead in my twenties. It’s a state familiar to many. Study hard, get good grades, get a good job. Then put your head down and keep going, indefinitely. This is what I call the “default path.”
Growing up, I thought making $100,000 a year made someone rich. When I made that amount for the first time at 27, I felt like I had more than I could ever need. Yet I opted into an identity that didn’t accept such complacency. Everyone around me was always moving forward towards the next achievement.
Chasing achievements is what brought me to that New York City job working with CEOs, the final one before I decided to quit. Most mornings I came into the office and sat there struggling to start my day. I watched the people pass my desk and wondered if they felt the same stuckness as I did.
Eventually, I would start my work, helping company boards assess their senior executives to see who the next CEO of the company should be. I read through feedback reports from people throughout the company and created summarized reports of each executive’s strengths and weaknesses. We like to think that once we “make it” we can finally be ourselves, but based on who the companies selected, it was clear that the longer people stay at a company, the higher odds that they would become what the company wanted.  I realized I didn’t want that to happen to me.
In a ten‑year period, I worked for five companies and spent two years in grad school. I moved from job to job, convinced the next stop was always the final stop.
My restlessness was easy to hide because my path was filled with impressive names and achievements, and when you’re on such a path, no one asks “Why are you doing this?” It took me a while to recognize this blind spot and have the courage to start asking myself those kinds of deeper questions in a serious way.
Which led me to walk away. Scratch that – run away. I even gave back a $24,000 signing bonus and missed out on a $30,000 bonus if I had been able to stick it out for another nine months. I left with the intention to become a freelance consultant, but soon enough, that story started to show its cracks as well. It didn’t take me long to realize I had been on a path that wasn’t mine and to find a new way forward, I would need to step into the unknown.
About a year into this journey, I stumbled upon a phrase which helped me take a deep breath. It was the idea of a “pathless path,” something I found in David Whyte’s book The Three Marriages. To Whyte, a pathless path is a paradox: “we cannot even see it is there, and we do not recognize it.”1 To me, the pathless path was a mantra to reassure myself I would be okay. After spending the first 32 years of my life always having a plan, this kind of blind trust in the universe was new, scary, and exciting. Whyte says that when we first encounter the idea of a pathless path, “we are not meant to understand what it means.”
To me, however, it meant everything.
The pathless path is an alternative to the default path. It is an embrace of uncertainty and discomfort. It’s a call to adventure in a world that tells us to conform. For me, it’s also a gentle reminder to laugh when things feel out of control and trusting that an uncertain future is not a problem to be solved.
Ultimately, it’s a new story for thinking about finding a path in life.
As the world continues to change and technology reshapes our lives, the stories we use to navigate life become outdated and come up short. People are starting to feel the disconnect between what we’ve been told about how the world works and what they experience. You work hard, but get laid off anyway. You have the perfect life on paper, but no time to enjoy it. You retire with millions in the bank, but no idea what to do with your time.
The pathless path has been my way to release myself from the achievement narrative that I had been unconsciously following. I was able to shift away from a life built on getting ahead and towards one focused on coming alive. I was able to grapple with the hard questions of life, the ones we try so hard to ignore. And I was able to keep moving when I realized that the hardest questions often don’t have answers.
One of the biggest things the pathless path did for me was to help me reimagine my relationship with work. When I left my job, I had a narrow view of work and wanted to escape. On the pathless path, my conception expanded, and I was able to see the truth: that most people, including myself, have a deep desire to work on things that matter to them and bring forth what is inside them. It is only when we cling to the logic of the default path that we fail to see the possibilities for making that happen.
I had been following a formula for life that was supposed to guarantee happiness. It didn’t. Confusion kept me on a path that wasn’t mine for more than ten years. Along the way, I learned how to play the game of success and achievement, but never paused to find out what I really wanted. I found myself in rooms surrounded by business leaders and didn’t quite fit in. I was in the wrong rooms, asking the wrong questions about how to live.
The Default Path
This book does not argue for or against any singular way of living, but it contests the idea that the default path is the only way.
By default path, I mean a series of decisions and accomplishments needed to be seen as a successful adult. These vary by country, but in the United States, we refer to this as the “American Dream,” which means a life centered around a good job, owning a home, and having a family.
Researchers Dorthe Berntsen and David Rubin study what they call “life scripts,” which they describe as “culturally shared expectations as to the order and timing of life events in a prototypical life course.”2 Their research found remarkable consistency across countries with regard to the events that people expect to occur in their lives. Most of these moments occur before the age of 35: graduating from school, getting a job, falling in love, and getting married.3
This means that for many people, expectations of life are centered around a small number of positive events that occur while we are young. Much of the rest of our lives remains unscripted and when people face inevitable setbacks, they are left without instructions on how to think or feel. While very few young people expect to have one job or career, most still rely on the logic of the default path and assume they need to have everything figured out before the age of 25. This limits the ideas of what we see as possible and many, including  me, internalize the “worldly wisdom” that John Maynard Keynes once pointed out, “that it is better for reputation to fail conventionally than to succeed unconventionally.”4
Since 2017, I’ve had hundreds of virtual “curiosity conversations” with people from around the world about work and life. I’ve seen the shame of unexpected layoffs, the panic attacks from changing jobs, and the loss of hope people experience when they can’t make it work on the particular path they think they are supposed to follow. On top of that, people are ashamed to talk about these things with the people in their lives.
This anxiety is not limited to young people. Increasingly, people at the end of traditional work careers tell me they are not excited about the default story of retirement. They still have a desire to engage with the world but don’t know how to make that happen. As of 2018, men and women in developed countries are expected to spend nearly 20 years in retirement.5 As the baby boomer generation enters this new life stage, bringing with them unprecedented wealth, health, and energy, they will be looking for new stories about how to live their lives.
These stories motivate me to keep going on my own journey and give me plenty to write about. Without intending to, I’ve become a repository of wisdom about how to navigate life and build a better relationship with work. Much of what I’ve learned through these conversations has inspired this book.
Prior to embracing the pathless path, I was the friend that people came to when they had career challenges. I once worked closely with a young professional in his mid‑20s who wanted to escape his current job. As he described his career options, he told me he could keep progressing at his company and become a partner or he could take a position at a client’s firm and “coast,” as he put it.
“Are those the only two options?” I asked. “Yes,” he replied. I listed a few other paths that he conceded were possible, but he added, “I don’t know anyone who has done that.” Many people fall into this trap. We are convinced that the only way forward is the path we’ve been on or what we’ve seen people like us do.  This is a silent conspiracy that constrains the possibilities of our lives.
I was testing out a side gig as a career coach when I first met that young professional. He hated his job and wanted to make a change. As he found a new role, working in another company, he lost all motivation to keep working with me and exploring the things that mattered to him.
This disappointed me. I wanted him to see the potential I saw. Yet in my own life, I was doing the same thing. With every new job, I convinced myself I was thriving. But what I was really doing was trying to escape feeling stuck.
I was too afraid to have a deeper conversation with myself. The kind that might pull me towards a different kind of life.
Why This Matters
For most of my life, I’ve had the gift of seeing the greatness in others. It hurts when I see people stuck or unable to pursue their dreams, and I want to do anything I can to help them. In writing this book, I realized that this has everything to do with my parents.
I won the childhood lottery. I had two parents that devoted their lives to creating the best life possible for my siblings and me. They did this by figuring out what they were best at and then giving it their complete commitment.
For my mother, it was being an active parent. Right from the start, she had an intuitive sense of my needs. She gave me space to make my own decisions and I learned how to take ownership of my life. She helped remove any obstacles in my way and helped me grow into a confident adult. At every step of my journey, the courage to take the next step was a direct result of her abundant love and compassion.
My father prioritized work. I struggled with this for many years. I wished he was around more. As I got older, however, I realized that this decision was just as hard on him and that he didn’t have any other choice.
At 19 he took a job at a manufacturing company and didn’t think about working anywhere else for another 41 years. The story he told himself throughout his entire career was that he had to work harder than everyone else. Why? He didn’t have a degree. As he earned promotions, he found himself surrounded by people with impressive credentials and likely felt more pressure to keep up. Yet he never complained. He woke up every day at 5 a.m., put in 12‑hour days, said yes to every single thing asked of him, and in doing so, was able to have a remarkable career and ensured that my siblings and I had more options than he did.
My mother also believed that not having a degree held her back and she was right. A couple of years after college, I helped her apply for a job at another school as a director of a financial aid department. The recruiting committee said that her cover letter “was one of the best they had seen” and that she was the best candidate, but because she didn’t have a degree, they were offering the position to someone else.
This hurt me so much. I knew that my mother was smart and capable and that a degree had nothing to do with what she had to offer the world.
The best option available for my parents was the default path. This worked remarkably well for them, which is what made leaving it so damn hard. I know how much they sacrificed so that I would have better career opportunities. However, what they really gave me was so much more than the ability to succeed in school and work. It was space to dream, take risks, and be able to explore more possibilities for my life.
Many people find it difficult to create change in their lives because they lack someone that believes in them. I have parents, aunts, uncles, grandparents, teachers, and managers who believe in me. Their support gives me an advantage and because of this, nothing motivates me more than trying to be that person for others. I am inspired by what the writer Leo Rosten once argued was the purpose of life: “to be useful, to be honorable, to be compassionate, to have it make some difference that you have lived and lived well.”6 The pathless path has helped me see that quitting my job was never about escaping work or living an easier life, it was about using the gifts I received from my parents to benefit others.
Helping people live courageously so that they can thrive is one of the most important things in the world. I want to see people live the lives they are capable of, not just the ones they think they are allowed to live.
I wrote this book to show you that this is possible.
My journey on the pathless path is about slowly figuring this out and helping countless people from around the world realize the same thing.
Now it’s your turn. What follows is not a simple playbook, but an invitation to join me on the pathless path to see what might happen if we imagine a new story together.
Ready?

2
Getting Ahead
The ease of having an ambition is that it can be explained to others; the very disease of ambition is that it can be so easily explained to others. – David Whyte
World Class Hoop-Jumper
The term “hoop‑jumper” was coined by writer and former professor William Deresiewicz to describe the behavior of his students at Yale, who seemed more concerned about getting A’s and adding bullet points to their resumes than using their time at one of the world’s best universities to follow their curiosity.7
Focused on landing good internships or jobs, or getting accepted into graduate schools, his students based their choices on which classes and activities would improve their chances.  Many had been playing this game for their entire lives, moving from one elite school to the next, fueled by lofty parental expectations.
Even though I ended up playing the same games, my childhood was remarkable for its lack of pressure, hands‑off parents, and a genuine love of school. In high school, I was a top student but never considered applying to top‑ranked schools. I was only interested in going to the University of Connecticut, my home‑state school. The biggest reason? I could get five‑dollar tickets to sit in the student section of the men’s basketball games.
When I was accepted, I was admitted into the honors program, and assigned to live in a building with other honors students. I didn’t know it at the time, but this would have an enormous impact on my future. I was surrounded by people with bold aspirations and impressive achievements. People with perfect SAT scores, full scholarships, and five‑year plans. I was genuinely surprised to hear about the extensive processes that some students had gone through to pick a school, weighing the trade-offs among scholarships, rankings, job opportunities, and access to grad schools. I just wanted to go to basketball games.
But these people became my friends and I started to want what they wanted. They embodied a success ethic that focused on maximizing achievements in the present to create better options in the future. I started to resent the high school I had attended, where the guidance counselor suggested I try a major other than engineering because “it was hard.” Why hadn’t people pushed me harder? Should I have applied to better schools?
As a late arrival to this game, I didn’t have the baggage of anxiety and stress that a lot of my new friends seemed to have after years of chasing achievements. I was shocked at how some of them worked to exhaustion, filling their schedules beyond what they could handle. I wasn’t willing to compete on that level, but I still wanted to keep up, so I became obsessed with figuring out the rules and learning how to hack the system.
During my first semester of college, I created an Excel spreadsheet of my schedule for the next four years. Then I cross-referenced it with a site called RateMyProfessor.com so I could optimize my schedule based on the easiest graders for my courses. In my second year, I figured out how to petition the school to take more than the maximum 18 credits so that I could add easy classes, or as we called them, “guaranteed A’s,” to my course load.
When I started college, earning an A was table stakes for my honors classmates and me. This was the result of decades of grade inflation. By the mid-2000s, 42% of college students received A’s in their classes.8 This was a shift from the past. In the 1960s, earning an A was the third most likely grade after C’s and a B’s. For us, since getting an A was not only possible but expected, my classmates and I spent as much time finding loopholes to improve our grades as we did studying for tests.
I loved finding the loopholes. My dual engineering and business degree was challenging, but it conveniently avoided the hardest engineering classes. I also took classes at weird times to get easy grading professors. I still pursued impressive achievements like graduating with honors, but I picked a thesis advisor and classes that wouldn’t push me too hard. With every internship offer, Dean’s list award, and scholarship I earned, the intoxicating feeling of success ran through my body. I felt like I had it all figured out.
I was becoming a hoop-jumper just like Deresiewicz’s students at Yale, internalizing the idea that education is “doing your homework, getting the answers, acing the test.” I had not developed a sense that “something larger is at stake” as Deresiewicz says, and only was playing the game of student, not using my mind. 9
Strategy Consulting
By the end of my junior year, I had a high GPA, completed multiple internships, and had won several awards. Yet as I entered senior year, I was about to commit to the first goal worthy of my hoop-jumping ambitions. I decided to attempt to break into the elite world of strategy consulting.
Strategy consulting was born out of the growth of the manufacturing industry in the late 1800s in the United States. Originally referred to as “consulting engineers,” people like Frederick Taylor, Arthur D. Little, and Edwin Booz worked with manufacturing plants to increase their efficiency and profitability.10 They eventually helped establish some of the first consulting firms and throughout the 20th century, these companies evolved and expanded in scope and ambition. By the time I graduated, it was a multi-billion-dollar industry with hundreds of firms spanning the globe. These firms worked with CEOs and senior executives on large, important problems. For young ambitious people, they offered the potential to skip “climbing the ladder” and work directly on the most interesting business problems immediately after graduation.
Initially, these companies only hired from elite schools like Harvard and Yale. Later, as the industry expanded, they recruited more widely but were still selective. The University of Connecticut was not one of them, and instead was what they called a “non-target” school. I knew it would be a challenge to break into the industry, but I still wanted to give it a shot.
Committing to this goal gave me a mission, which also helped me ignore the growing anxiety about the transition from school to the “real world.” I had no wisdom to draw upon for navigating this important phase in life other than what everyone around me was doing: picking a path.
The modern world offers an abundance of paths. In one sense this is great. It’s the result of an industrial system and resulting prosperity that has created opportunities for people around the world. However, the proliferation of paths presents a challenge. With so many options it can be tempting to pick a path that offers certainty rather than doing the harder work of figuring out what we really want.
A friend, Ranjit Saimbi, who has since left law to pursue software development, shared that he was attracted to the law profession because “the steps are laid out for you.” A career in the law signaled to others that he “was a serious and intelligent person.” But the longer he spent on the path, he realized that the real promise had been that “life’s existential fears are traded for certainty.”11
The paths that Ranjit and I were drawn to also offered something else: prestige. Though hard to define, prestige can be thought of as the attention you get when you do things that others see as impressive. Paul Graham, the founder of a startup incubator and mentor to thousands of young people, sees this attention as a trap. In his view, prestige is “a powerful magnet that warps even your beliefs about what you enjoy.”12
Ranjit and I were both pulled by the force of the impressive stories associated with prestigious jobs like strategy consulting and law. These paths are too good to be true for driven young people who want to turn their success in school into something tangible for others to see. Zen philosopher Alan Watts argued that “the desire for security and the feeling of insecurity are the same thing,” and that “we look for this security by fortifying and enclosing ourselves in innumerable ways. We want the protection of being ‘exclusive’ and ‘special.’”13 This was exactly what I was looking for.
Entering my senior year of college, the pull of prestige took the wheel and I started plotting ways to overcome my status as a “non‑target” applicant.
Chasing Prestige
What I really wanted was to be part of the “inner ring,” which C.S. Lewis famously detailed in a lecture given at King’s College in 1944. He argued, “…in all men’s lives at certain periods…one of the most dominant elements is the desire to be inside the local Ring and the terror of being left outside.”14
Before the fall semester of senior year, I had built a spreadsheet of consulting companies and other jobs perceived as prestigious. This was the inner ring I cared about. Beyond consulting companies, it included investment banks, technology startups, and hedge funds. I wasn’t picky about the type of work I’d be doing, I just wanted it to be seen as impressive. I spent most of that semester in a frenzy, searching for companies I had missed, networking, sending cold e-mails, and trying to land interviews. Unfortunately, most of my efforts were met with near-instant rejection. My credentials were good enough but most of the companies had met their hiring targets with students from better schools.
Out of a couple of hundred companies, I did have a handful of interviews. This gave me a peek into the secret world of the inner ring. One of these interviews brought me to North Carolina where I took part in a “superday” for Wachovia’s investment bank.  A superday is a two‑day ordeal that includes meals, casual conversations with employees and other interviewees, and finally, several formal interviews on the second day.
When I arrived, I checked into my hotel and made my way to a high‑end cocktail bar down the street. Within fifteen minutes, I discovered that in a group of 30–40 people I was one of the few “non-target” applicants. Realizing this, I started to feel like I had crashed a wedding. Some of the candidates mentioned that their friends from school were already working at the company or that Wachovia was “only” a backup option. They were intrigued that I had landed an interview, but ultimately did not see me as a threat. These students from places like the University of Virginia, Duke, and Cornell oozed confidence, and as I now realize, they were already part of the inner ring. All they had to do now was figure out which company badge they would be wearing come graduation.
The next day, I went through the motions in eight 30‑minute interviews, but the entire time it felt like both the interviewers and I already knew what would happen. I received the rejection call two days later, and by the end of the semester, every company on my list had either rejected or ignored my application.
Still, my first close look inside the inner ring, while awkward, furthered my motivation. Now I wanted not only to break into this exclusive world but also to rid myself of the shame I felt that weekend, the feeling that I was not good enough.
Despite not breaking into the inner ring, I had still been working on a backup plan, which was to work in one of General Electric’s (GE) leadership development programs. At the time, GE still had a great reputation in the business world and prided itself on shying away from hiring the elite students I had been competing against. They preferred to hire people just like me, high achievers at big public schools.
I had interned at GE prior to my senior year and had the option to return the following year in an engineering role. However, during that summer, when I was first infected with the desire to chase prestige, I found out about their Financial Management Program. It was the inner ring within GE and seen as the fast track to success inside the company. Even though my internship had been in engineering, and I had taken only a few finance classes, I applied to the program and convinced recruiters that this was my ideal path. When I got the offer, I canceled the other interviews I had on‑campus. GE wasn’t part of the inner ring I cared about, but it was still seen as one of the best jobs you could get at my school.
Why would anyone go through the trouble of applying to so many jobs? One part of the answer is that I have always enjoyed the job search process. The more complicated and more accurate answer would be that I got sucked into a chase after achievement in an environment where maximizing potential success was one of the best things to do with your time. My friends all had impressive plans after graduation, and I didn’t want to be left behind. People were impressed by the job I was taking at GE, and I liked how the attention made me feel. I felt smart. It didn’t matter that I had never worked in finance and had never spent any time in Ohio or the Midwest, where I would be located. Out of all the jobs I could get from my school, this was one of the best and the magnet of prestige convinced me that was what I wanted.
After graduation, I made the two‑day drive to Ohio with my cousin Brian. I remember two things about the drive: Hey There, Delilah coming on the radio every forty minutes and being filled with a sense of unease. For the first time, I would be living outside of a 15-mile bubble in Connecticut. Moving to a new city and working for a great company like GE was exciting, but deep down I felt like I wasn’t where I wanted to be.  I tried to pretend I was happy to be starting the job, but I wanted more.
My unease quickly morphed into a desire to escape. When I joined, GE was a 100‑year‑old company with a great reputation but was starting to show its age. I couldn’t imagine spending the rest of my career there, let alone two years. No one seemed to care about anything. My colleagues had been coming to the same desks for decades and were more interested in their retirement portfolios than working and told me that if not for the benefits, they probably wouldn’t show up.
My program included four 6-month rotations in different parts of the business, and I barely finished two. I decided I was going to quit as I drove to Jacksonville, Florida, for my second rotation. I called my friend Mike, who was set to move to Boston for a job later that year. “Mike, if I move to Boston in June, do you want to live together?” “Hell yeah!” he said. It was settled. Boston was a place where I might have a better shot at landing a job at one of those companies in the inner ring while being closer to my friends and family.
In Jacksonville, I ramped up part two of my job search, applying to many of the same companies that had rejected me only a year earlier. Crazily enough, this period ended with me landing my dream job. Yes, that’s right. About a month after arriving in Florida, I found a job posting for a research analyst at McKinsey & Company, the company at the top of my list. After several rounds of interviews, I landed an offer to join the company in the Boston office.
It felt too good to be true, and how people perceived this achievement differed from how I experienced it. Others saw an impressive new job at McKinsey, a smart career move. Yet for me it was a lucky outcome after a year of restlessness, immaturity, insecurity, and a desperate desire to escape.
Part of me had been secretly excited about quitting my job and moving to a new city without a job, drawn by the possibilities of adventure. That part of me would get its chance but it would have to wait several years.
I said goodbye to Florida and drove a U‑Haul back north with my father, excited about my next step. I had a second chance at starting my post‑college life, this time in the real inner ring.
The Inner Ring
Walking into the office on that first day, I was thrilled. At McKinsey, I was grateful to be surrounded by enthusiastic and curious people instead of people working for the weekend. I worked with managers that cared about me and pushed me to improve.
Although I felt like an outsider that had somehow broken into an exclusive world, I slowly started to absorb the norms and desires of the people around me. Unlike at GE, where mentioning any interests beyond the job was taboo, at McKinsey people openly shared their ambitions to attend top graduate schools, become CEOs, or work for other prestigious institutions. For many of my coworkers, McKinsey was only a stop on the way to bigger things.
I adopted this attitude and embraced a version of a career which philosopher Andrew Taggart, who writes about our modern relationship to work, describes as “a first-person work‑centric story of progress about an individual’s life course.”15 From this perspective, my career was not a series of jobs, but a high‑stakes proposition, one where falling behind felt like failure. My colleagues and I dealt with this pressure by constantly talking about potential career paths and “exit options.” This was helpful for someone new to this world like me. I could figure out how to stay in the inner ring by following the wisdom of my peers.
A year went by and I decided my next step was going to a top business school. This idea did not emerge out of thin air. Talks of applications, essays, and school rankings filled the daily lunchroom conversations. These people were my friends and when they were accepted into elite business schools like Harvard and Stanford, it seemed obvious that I should do the same thing. This is the trap of prestigious career paths. Instead of thinking about what you want to do with your life, you default to the options most admired by your peers.
In describing the power of the inner ring, C.S. Lewis warns that, ”unless you take measures to prevent it, this desire is going to be one of the chief motives of your life, from the first day on which you enter your profession until the day when you are too old to care.” He believed “any other kind of life, if you lead it, will be the result of conscious and continuous effort.”
In this world, the natural thing was to leave McKinsey, despite loving the work, because that was what everyone did. Near the end of my second year, I was accepted into a dual‑degree program at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. If you had shown me Lewis’ quote and tried to convince me there was any “other kind of life” I would not have believed it.
The path I was on was too good to be true and I was more than happy to be on it.
Existential Opening
The philosopher Andrew Taggart believes that crisis moments lead to “existential openings” that force us to grapple with the deepest questions about life.16
He argues there are two typical ways this happens. One is the “way of loss,” when things that matter are taken from us, such as loved ones, our health, or a job. The other path is the “way of wonderment,” when we are faced with moments of undeniable awe and inspiration.
I first experienced the “way of loss” in 2010 at the end of my second year at McKinsey, a month before starting graduate school.
I was at my parent’s house and we received a call from my sister who was visiting my grandfather. She seemed worried. My grandfather had been diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. He had dealt with health issues for years, but this felt different. As soon as I heard, I had a lump in my throat. I sat on the back deck with my mother trying to make sense of the news.
We did what almost everyone does when faced with a harsh truth: we denied it. It was early May and my grandparents were scheduled to return to Connecticut for the summer in a few weeks. The news was bad, but neither my mother nor I thought it was urgent. He’d make it back to Connecticut we told ourselves
Life had other plans. By mid‑week, he had taken a turn for the worse, and by Friday, almost all of my relatives from across the country had boarded planes to see him in Arizona. I arrived towards the end of the week and shared the back seat with my cousins as my uncle drove us to my grandfather’s house. That 30‑minute ride was one of the longest in my life. No one spoke and we were all thinking the same thing: please still be alive.
Over the next couple of days, 25 of us were scattered around the two‑bedroom house taking turns visiting him one‑on‑one and as a family. I remember standing around the bed holding hands with my family and feeling the deepest pain of my life as tears streamed down my cheeks.
My grandfather was a larger‑than‑life figure, and I loved spending time with him. When I was 13, he bought a house on the lake in my town, and I developed a deeper relationship with him and my grandmother. The house became not only a second home, but a gathering space for friends, family, and acquaintances. The door was open to everyone as long as they agreed to eat my grandfather’s food.
He never talked about his childhood, but according to his siblings, after their mother died, he was sent to live on a farm with his uncle. Sometime around fourth grade, he stopped going to school so that he could start working with his uncle. He didn’t have a childhood filled with love and support. He chose to deal with it by trying to do better for his children and grandchildren and he succeeded. Like many of my cousins, we feel like we won the lottery growing up with a family like ours, where thanks to my grandfather we had access to a magical world filled with love, laughter, and possibility.
Sitting in the house in Arizona, I knew I was about to lose him, one of the most important people in my life. Those few days were filled with tears and overwhelming emotion, but also with beauty and a profound sense of meaning. The proof of his life’s work was in front of us. He had succeeded in creating a world better than the one he had grown up in. It was clear to me in those moments that family, love, and relationships were the most important things in the world.
Despite this clarity, I struggled to remain present in the days before he passed. I couldn’t stop thinking about work. What if my colleagues needed me? To settle my anxiety, I drove to a local café and checked my email. Everything was fine. A colleague messaged me, “What are you doing!? Go back with your family, we got you!” I smiled and closed my laptop.
Driving back from the café, I was angry at myself. Why had I been so worried about work, something that was clearly not important? As I walked back into my grandfather’s house, the house was silent. He was taking his final breaths. Had I nearly missed this moment because of some silly emails? I joined hands with my family, said a prayer, and left my worries aside for the next few days.
That experience sent me down the “way of loss,” opening me up to the questions I had ignored by orienting my life around my work.
What was I living for?
What did I really want?
How did I want to look back on my life when it was my time to go?
Difficult questions but ones that I was finally ready to contemplate.
Business School
I started business school a month after losing my grandfather. I was excited to be in school again, but his loss overshadowed everything and opened me up emotionally. In those months, everything was filled with meaning. Relationships felt more important. Books, songs, and movies made me cry, and I became more curious about everything.
I tried to integrate these changes into my life by shifting my attention away from my career and towards my friendships, relationships, and learning. I prioritized classes that interested me, and I didn’t pay as much attention to grades. In my first semester, one of my classes was filled with what I determined was pointless busy‑work. I decided to skip most of the assignments, earning a C+ in the class, the first “C” of my life, and a failing grade in business school.
I still passed most of my classes, but after three years of putting my career first, I was able to put life first. My memories of business school are the conversations with friends at Beacon Hill Pub, watching Jersey Shore at Mike’s, cultural celebrations, formal parties, intramural hockey, and basketball games, touring factories across the world, and most notably, performing an Irish Jig in front of 500 people. In a class at the end of the two years, my friend Kurtis shared that he thought I was someone that “lived life to its fullest.” This was surprising and humbling to hear. It was the first time I realized that I had leaned into the questions that arose after losing my grandfather and had focused more on creating memories than getting good grades.
Unfortunately, I wasn’t on a permanent vacation. I spent all my savings and took $70,000 in debt with an intention to continue on my path.
McKinsey had a program that would pay for school if you committed to returning to work there for at least two years. I was so confident that I didn’t want to return to consulting that I never considered it. Unfortunately, by the time recruiting started in the second year, I had not come up with any other plan. So I applied to all the same consulting firms that I had in college.
The companies were confused. McKinsey was seen as the top firm, so why was I applying to their competitors? My explanations didn’t suffice, and all of the big firms rejected me. Then McKinsey rejected me too. I had been far too casual about the whole process and assumed that they would accept me. This was naïve. I was walking down Charles Street in Boston when I got the call. It was embarrassing. I felt like a loser. I might be the only person ever rejected by a company both before and after having worked there. Was I back to where I had been just a few years earlier, still trying to break into the inner ring?
Now, it’s easy to see that I wasn’t as committed to this path as my classmates and when I was “putting my life first” they were preparing for interviews.
Cracks in my career identity were starting to appear, but I was barely aware of them and had no conception of any other kind of life other than the default path I was on.
Months after most of my classmates had secured offers, a small consulting firm in Boston offered me a position. The opportunity was exciting, but it enabled me to ignore those emerging cracks. I had loosened my attachment to “Paul as a successful person,” but was still firmly located in that successful world.
Health Crisis
The most interesting thing about the company I joined was the part-time consultants we hired to augment our projects, giving me exposure to the emerging gig economy. In addition to normal consulting projects, we recruited and staffed these consultants on short‑term projects. These people, self-described “independent consultants,” were fascinating. Everyone had a unique story and way of working. Some worked three days per week. Others worked for six months and then took six months off to travel. Some people worked on side projects and others spent time with their families. This was the first time I had direct contact with anyone who did anything other than work full‑time. I was intrigued.
I might have explored that kind of life sooner if I had not spent most of my 18 months at the company dealing with health issues. In my first weeks at the company, I developed a cold that never went away. Persistent fatigue took over my body and over a couple of months, I also started experiencing bouts of brain fog and physical pain throughout my body. My life became a blur. I went through the motions at work and spent the rest of my time going from doctor to doctor trying to figure out what was wrong.
I developed strategies to deal with exhaustion and pain and blocked off at least 10‑12 hours every night for sleep. Somehow, I still showed up every day and did as well as I could. About five months after the issues began, I was working on a client project in Princeton, New Jersey, when the doctor called with what I thought was good news. Tests confirmed I had a complex case of Lyme disease and there was a treatment she thought could help.
I started taking the medicine and immediately found myself in more pain. Doctors call this a “herx” reaction, something that occurs from the die‑off of a bacterial infection, common for people dealing with Lyme disease. I spent eight hours at the client’s office building an impressive spreadsheet, drenched in sweat, trying to handle the pain. I couldn’t wait to get back to my hotel room.
That room might have been impressive in 1980, but by 2012 it existed only to house corporate types like me doing business somewhere along Route 1, a road lined with office parks, chain restaurants, and hotels. Randomly, the room had a large jacuzzi bathtub in the middle of the bedroom and I decided to use it to relieve my discomfort. As I sat in the tub, surrounded by the room’s off‑brown wallpaper, I felt helpless and afraid.
I made it through the week and that weekend I called Peter, the head of our office, and told him everything. He clearly understood how scared I was because when I proposed taking a week off or working remotely, he suggested I take a month off, paid, to focus on recovery. I was worried about letting him and the client down, but he told me that those things were trivial. At the time, our firm was struggling and as the head of the office, he put his own job at stake by pausing an important client project. It was a moment of leadership that inspired me.
Unfortunately, I didn’t improve. One month became several and I went from paid to unpaid leave. Several treatments seemed to work before becoming ineffective. My doctor was just as confused, and I drifted into despair. Why me? When would this nightmare end?
To process these questions, I wrote. I had written the occasional blog post over the years, but this was the first time writing became necessary. I was a typical guy who hid his emotions and writing gave me a way to share without dealing with the discomfort of doing so in person. I created a blog called “Lyme Sucks” to share my progress with concerned friends and family. Over time, writing the blog became an essential part of maintaining hope. It wasn’t easy, and the following post shows how desperate I was for good news:
January 8th, 2013 - I’ve written a couple blog posts over the past couple months that I never posted because I deemed them too depressing or emotional. I decided to go ahead with this one because I threw some fun stuff in at the end. If anything, it will give you some insight into what people go through when they get sick. A lot of what I struggle with is really irrational and wouldn’t ever occur to me if I was healthy, but I am learning more every day how to cope with it all. I was ignorant of people suffering before I got sick last year, and I’ve definitely learned a lot. Hopefully I can be there for others in the future that are going through tough things in their life.
For me, these blog posts are a good way to vent and figure out my own thoughts. Generally, I am in good spirits and happy, but every new day is tough to get through. I can’t even really describe the panic that comes over me during moments of doubt and fear, but I’ve realized those are part of the journey. When I come up for air, I realize how great things are, how lucky I am and that things aren’t so bad. I appreciate the friends and family that stick by me when things get ugly. I need all of your help to keep the good times rolling and helping me through those bad moments.
By forcing my fingers to type sentences filled with optimism and hope, I was able to keep that part of me alive. This is the hardest thing about being sick. It isn’t like a breakup when people tell you it will get better and you know they’re right. When you’re sick, you have to believe you will get better even though your body is telling you you’re crazy to think that.
My version of “better” was to restart my career. I could start working again, hang out with my friends, do the things I liked, and pretend that nothing had ever happened. I shared this desire with my friend Jordan over pizza: “Just wait until I recover, then you can get to know how fun I really am.” His reply shocked me: “Paul, that’s crazy, I’ve only known you since you’ve been sick and you’re still pretty great.” I tried to change his mind, but I couldn’t.
The truth was that my experience of the illness was changing me and there would be no going back. Jordan’s compassion gave me the courage to abandon my attachment to seeing myself as a “broken” sick person waiting to restart my life and realize that something new was likely emerging.
With a new doctor in Boston, I found better treatments that worked and after more than a year of struggling, I started to improve. I returned to work part‑time and eventually full‑time, but I was not the same person. While I was sick, I had contemplated the question, “what would people think if I couldn’t work again?” and had been surprised by my answer. I would be okay. So much of my identity had been connected with being a high achiever. Straight A’s. Dean’s List. McKinsey. MIT. When I was sick, I would have traded every last credential for a single day of feeling okay.
As I started to feel better, a different kind of energy showed up in my life. Professors Richard Tedeschi and Lawrence Calhoun have suggested that many people who face crises often experience “post-traumatic growth” and that this manifests as an “appreciation for life in general, more meaningful interpersonal relationships, an increased sense of personal strength, changed priorities, and a richer existential and spiritual life.”17
This is exactly what I experienced over the next few years. Through a series of unexpected steps, I was shifting towards embracing the pathless path.

3
Work, Work, Work
Until I had to take a leave from my job during my health crisis, work had been a fact of life for me. I, like many others, had expected to work in a full‑time job for most of my adult life. My illness helped me see the fragility of this worldview because now I understood that building a life around work was not so simple.
My new perspective on work led me down a deep rabbit hole of questions and curiosities that led to me leaving my path and also led to this book. This is why before we move forward in my story, we need to take a step back.
If we are going to imagine a new way forward for our work and our lives, we need to understand where our current ideas from work come from and how they have changed.
Where Do Work Beliefs Come From?
German historian Max Weber found that the “spirit of capitalism” struggled to take hold in societies that embraced a “traditionalist” mindset towards work.18 In Weber’s view, a “traditionalist” view of work is one where people work as much as they need to maintain their current lifestyle, and once that aim is achieved, they stop working.
In my travels, I have been surprised to find this perspective alive and well all over the world. In Mexico, I overheard a conversation about hiring locals: “You can’t pay people too much because they’ll stop working!” The idea that people might decide to work less is hard for some people to imagine. This person, a foreigner, likely grew up in a culture like mine where working in a formal job continuously throughout adulthood is what most people do.
The difference between working to meet one’s needs versus meeting expectations raises a question. When did this shift occur and why did it not happen universally?
It might surprise you that in Greece, during the time of Aristotle more than 2,000 years ago, work was simply considered a necessary evil. The prime aim of life according to philosophers was “Eudaimonia,” which translates literally as “happiness,” but is better expressed as “flourishing.” In Aristotle’s words, “the more contemplation, the more happiness there is in a life.” Contemplating one’s place in the universe was seen as one of the most worthwhile things to do and at minimum, more important than the “money-making life,” which Aristotle described as “something quite contrary to nature…for it is merely useful as a means to something else.”19
For the next 1,500 years, most of the world either remained skeptical of work or saw it simply as a way to meet basic needs. The latter idea was strengthened by the Catholic conception of work.
Genesis, the first book of the Christian Old Testament, mentions work as God is condemning Adam for eating fruit from the Tree of Life. God tells him that only “through painful toil” will Adam continue to eat fruit and only “by the sweat of your brow will you eat your food until you return to the ground.” Later, in the New Testament, St. Paul warns against idleness more directly: “He who shall not work shall not eat.” In regard to those who refuse, he continues: “do not associate with them, in order that they may feel ashamed.”20
The lesson is clear: work is a duty. However, it was still in a limited sense. We see this articulated by 13th-century Catholic priest Thomas Aquinas, as he argues “labor is only necessary ‘naturali ratione’ [by natural reason] for the maintenance of individual and community.”21 People should be expected to work, but the reason is to meet the needs of our families and communities.
In the 1500s, Martin Luther and John Calvin expanded this definition as part of what is now known as the Protestant Reformation. They had grown disappointed in religious leaders and attacked them for living idly in monasteries. Their angle of attack was one’s relationship to work. Max Weber summarizes the shift, saying that the way to honor God, “was not to surpass worldly morality in monastic asceticism, but solely through the fulfillment of the obligations imposed upon the individual by his position in the world. That was his calling.”22
With the introduction of a “calling,” Luther and then Calvin both wanted to undermine the authority of the Catholic Church to govern an individual’s relationship with God. Luther took issue with the Church’s system of “indulgences,” in which people paid the Church to absolve them of their sins. He thought individuals should be able to have their own relationship with God. Calvin paired Luther’s increase in individual freedom with the idea that everyone is predestined to serve God through a specific calling. Working hard in the area of one’s calling determines the status of a person’s relationship with God.
In the 1940s, philosopher Erich Fromm summarized this transformation, saying, “in the Northern European countries, from the 16th century on, man developed an obsessional craving to work which had been lacking in a free man before that period.” 23 Following the Reformation, then, work as an end in itself was no longer a crazy idea. People traded one master, the Catholic Church, for another, their vocation. But along with greater freedom and self‑determination came the anxiety and insecurity of never really knowing if you were working hard enough or doing the right thing. The Church’s expectations had always provided a way to measure “goodness,” and for many, these benchmarks no longer applied.
Over the last 500 years, this freedom has taken us in many different directions, yet remnants of the Catholic and Protestant conceptions of work are still with us. When entrepreneur Gary Vaynerchuk tells us in his book Crush It to “wake up before everybody else and work into the night. Hustle,” he accepts both the duty of work and absolute commitment to work as integral to life.24 Oprah Winfrey channels a modern spin on Calvin’s calling, arguing that “each of us has a personal calling.” To her, the “best way to succeed is to discover what you love and then find a way to offer it to others in the form of service, working hard, and also allowing the energy of the universe to lead you.”25
These Catholic and Protestant perspectives on work are deeply embedded in the modern default path view of work that spans the globe but has become detached from the time periods and traditions from which they emerged. Religious scholars point out that the Protestant “work ethic” is more than a blind obsession with work. It is paired with thrift, self-discipline, and humility. Yet as fewer people look to religion for wisdom on how to navigate life, they are only left with the watered‑down version of these views.
In Anne Helen Peterson’s widely read essay “How Millennials Became the Burnout Generation,” she voiced her confusion with work as she wrote that she had “…internalized the idea that I should be working all the time. Why have I internalized that idea? Because everything and everyone in my life has reinforced it – explicitly and implicitly – since I was young.”26
Peterson’s experience is similar to my own. As I was growing up, work was such an obvious goal of life that I never paused for a moment to question it. Adults talked about work all the time and constantly asked me what I wanted to do when I grew up. Schools reinforced this perspective and we learned to study hard to earn good grades to get a good job. As I grew older, I was convinced that a good career was the most important thing in life. Later, I was shocked to learn that for most of human history, this was not the case.
It Was an Anomaly!
The educated, hardworking masses are still doing what they’re told, but they’re no longer getting what they deserve. – Seth Godin
The modern version of the default path was born after World War II, in a period of unprecedented economic growth. This shift in thinking was led by the United States which, due to its financial and industrial advantages, achieved a period of success now known as the “long boom” during which annual GDP growth rates of at least four to five percent were the norm.
This economy generated full‑time jobs with good incomes, benefits, and career opportunities, enabling a broad middle class to reach new levels of wealth and material comfort. Professor Raj Chetty at Harvard found that nine out of ten people born right after World War II did better economically than their parents.27 Over time people came to expect constant advancement in their lives. John Steinbeck captured the sentiment in his book America and Americans in 1966:
No longer was it even acceptable that the child should be like his parents and live as they did; he must be better, live better, know more, dress more richly, and if possible, change from father’s trade to a profession. This dream became touchingly national.28
The baby boomer generation was born in the middle of this period, came of age at the tail end of it, and rose to leadership in global institutions by the end of the 20th century. By the time I graduated from college in 2007, the idea that life should be built around a good corporate job was so sacred that almost everyone had forgotten that only 100 years earlier most people worked on farms.
Peter Thiel, born right after the baby boom generation, reflected on this mentality in his book Zero to One, saying, “Since tracked careers worked for them [the baby boomers], they can’t imagine that they won’t work for their kids, too.”29
Asset manager, writer, and baby boomer Jim O’Shaughnessy argues that this approach to life is flawed and his generation’s mistake was to assume that the paths that worked for them would work forever:
We made a mistake and by that, I mean my generation and my parents’ generation. The mistake we made was thinking that the period from 1946 to 1980 was the norm. No, it was not! It was the anomaly! We had just wiped out the manufacturing capabilities of anyone who could challenge us. So, the idea that you had that job with the gold watch, and you could work there for your entire career and raise a family of four and all of that, that was an anomaly.30
During that stretch of time, it would have been a mistake to opt-out of the default path because as Thiel points out, “whether you were born in 1945 or 1950 or 1955, things got better every year for the first 18 years of your life, and it had nothing to do with you.”31
By the time I graduated from college many decades later, I assumed that the path to a good life was through a steady career path at a big company. Now I know that what I assumed was an outcome of a certain way of working was instead accidental meaning. The paths that enabled people to thrive were the result of unique economic and historical circumstances and as I entered the workforce, these circumstances were no longer.
A look at the company where my father worked for 41 years demonstrates this point. During the first 20 years of his career, in the 1980s and 1990s, the company’s sales grew on average by more than 14 percent per year. Over the next 21 years, the growth rate slowed to a little more than four percent per year. My father hadn’t joined a big, boring company when he was young; instead, he joined a rocket ship, something closer to the fast‑growing tech startups of the 2000s.
It wasn’t until my early 30s that I started to suspect something was amiss. Like many of the people I knew, I was single, renting, and living and working in a city away from my hometown. Those who were starting families were overwhelmed with the costs of daycare, healthcare, and housing. We entered adulthood thinking we could copy‑and‑paste what our parents had done, but it was more complicated than that. Factors that support meaningful lives, like economic growth across all sectors, a young population, two‑parent households, generous pensions, and company loyalty were anomalies of the past, as O’Shaughnessy points out.
Starting my career, I didn’t understand any of this. Plus, I was too busy getting sucked into a new idea. That you didn’t simply work to live, but that it should be one of the most important things in your life.
The Meaningful Work Trap
My generation entered the workforce with high expectations. We didn’t want to see work merely as an obligation, we also wanted it to be meaningful and fulfilling. We wanted the modern version of the “calling” that Oprah talked about.
This idea gained popularity in the late 1990s. In “Jobs, Careers, and Callings,” a famous study by Yale professor Amy Wrzesniewski and others, people were asked if they defined their work as a job, career, or a calling. People who defined their work as a calling saw their work as “inseparable from their life” and worked, “not for ﬁnancial gain or career advancement, but instead for the fulﬁllment that doing the work brings to the individual.” The researchers boldly concluded that if people could find work they saw as a calling it would improve their “life, health, and job satisfaction.”32
While Calvin argued that callings were predestined, Wrzesniewski and her co-writers were offering a new path to fulfillment and all it required was finding a better job or even simpler, changing our mindset toward work. This idea spread and many people, including myself, started to search for our own modern callings.
In my first year at GE, in response to complaints from young employees, the company started building career pages on social media and investing in efforts to rebrand itself to potential employees. It wanted to present itself as a “cool” place for young people to build a career. One big reason companies like GE were willing to start making changes was the emerging tech industry in California. The tech industry was offering benefits that seemed too good to be true and this shift was led by Google, which gained attention by debuting on the 2007 Best Places to Work list at #1.
I remember reading the description and being envious of the benefits they offered:
At Google you can do your laundry; drop off your dry cleaning; get an oil change, then have your car washed; work out in the gym; attend subsidized exercise classes; get a massage; study Mandarin, Japanese, Spanish, and French; and ask a personal concierge to arrange dinner reservations. Naturally you can get haircuts onsite. Want to buy a hybrid car? The company will give you $5,000 toward that environmentally friendly end.33
Google had made my list of prestigious companies, but it stood out from the rest. It was the only one at the time that promised that work could be fun. When I started at GE, my only understanding of a good relationship with work was “work‑life balance,” a concept popular in the early 2000s. While the term is still used today, it feels like it belongs to another era.
In the 2010s the expectation that work should be meaningful became a default expectation of college graduates. Young people no longer wanted simply to bide their time at a job but wanted a job with passion, purpose, and fun. By 2019, a survey of workers in the United States and Canada found that more than offering good pay and benefits, 78% of people thought “employers have a responsibility to keep employees mentally and physically well.”34
Companies do their best to keep up with these growing expectations, which can be easily observed by scanning the career pages of well-known companies. This is what I did in early 2021, compiled a list of recruiting slogans from over 100 companies.35 Some examples:
Facebook: “Do the most meaningful work of your life”
McKinsey: “Have a career that fits your calling”
Rope & Gray: “Write your own career story”
Phillip Morris: “Change the world”
Comcast: “Create the future with us”
Microsoft: “Do what you love”
Sears: “Jobs that transform your career”
Citibank: “Discover your next adventure”
When I graduated in 2007, Google’s promise to make work fun was the exception. Now every company is trying to be like Google. It’s high stakes when an entire generation of workers not only thinks that work should be the most important thing in their lives, but also that it should enable them to thrive in all aspects of their life.
A study from the University of Sussex by professors Bailey and Madden should cast doubts on whether these expectations can be met. In their research, they did in-depth interviews with 135 individuals in 10 different professions about the most meaningful moments in their jobs. Their conclusion: “helping people find meaning in their work is complex and profound, going far beyond the relative superficialities of satisfaction or engagement.” Their research found that instead of joy, meaningful experiences were “associated with mixed, uncomfortable, or even painful thoughts and feelings, not just a sense of unalloyed joy and happiness.”36
Despite thinking I wanted fun and joy at work for most of my career, when I reflect on the most meaningful moments of my career, they involve overcoming obstacles, or getting through setbacks to complete something I didn’t think I could.
This is much different than what most companies are promising and increasingly, what many people have come to expect out of work.
Wage-based Society
Sociologist André Gorz spent the latter half of the 20th writing about the role of work in society. He argued that many countries had evolved into places where the primary way one gained “membership” in society was through formal work. He called these places “wage-based societies” where the central ethic was, “never mind what work you do, what counts is having a job.“37
A powerful example of this kind of ethic can be seen when people refer to a parent who decides to become a full‑time caretaker of their children as someone that “decides to stay home.” This way of thinking leads to an oversimplification of how societies operate, assumptions on how people should live their lives, and ignorance of the realities and downsides of the “regular” way of working. Many people are surprised to find out that in the United States, one of the strongest “wage‑based societies” in the world, only about 40% of adult Americans, or 106 million people, have jobs where they work more than 35 hours per week.38
Seeing the job as a central element of a good life and employment rates as a metric of a successful society was not a common assumption until after World War II. In 1946, the United States formalized this by passing the Full Employment Act “to promote maximum employment.”39
This created a clear metric that everyone could use to judge a government’s performance and today, political leaders do whatever possible to protect or create jobs. One striking example is from 2009 when U.S. President Barack Obama explicitly mentioned jobs as the reason why he did not want to pursue a more ambitious healthcare policy:
Everybody who supports single‑payer healthcare says, ‘Look at all this money we would be saving from insurance and paperwork.’ That represents 1 million, 2 million, 3 million jobs of people who are working at Blue Cross Blue Shield or Kaiser or other places. What are we doing with them? Where are we employing them?40
Regardless of whether single‑payer healthcare would have improved lives or not, this decision shows that, at least in the United States, government leaders prefer to create or save jobs rather than doing anything that risks losing them. For Obama, it was also a smart decision, as the healthcare sector was one of the few areas that saw continued job growth after the 2008 recession, and the good “jobs numbers” were a key reason Obama was able to win re‑election.
For most people, having a job is better than not having a job, and the costs of unemployment are well documented in academic studies. Researchers at the University of Stirling found that people who are unemployed can become less friendly, less hard‑working, and less open to new experiences.41 Another study showed that although unemployed men have much more free time, they volunteer less often than similarly employed men.42
Based on this analysis, you could conclude that jobs are good, full stop. Unfortunately, this way of thinking is challenged by the dramatic shifts in the ways people are working. In 2016, economists Lawrence Katz and Alan Kreuger highlighted a group of 30 million people categorized by the U.S. government as “alternative” or “nontraditional” workers and showed that they were responsible for nearly all of U.S. job growth from 2005 to 2015, adding nearly 10 million jobs.43
McKinsey & Company found similar trends across Europe and estimated that more than 100 million people across the United States and Europe are now “nontraditional” employees. McKinsey compared these workers to “traditional” employees and found that they were as satisfied or more satisfied across fifteen different work characteristics, such as income, independence, hours, flexibility, creativity, and even recognition.44 Though this group is quite large, it doesn’t have a cohesive voice, and people are often surprised to find that most of these “alternative” workers are quite happy.
In addition to ignoring this new way of working, we also ignore the enormous amount of wasted energy and effort that is a part of many jobs. In his book Bullshit Jobs, David Graeber detailed stories of people working in jobs where they were personally convinced that nothing they did was of value. However, if you find yourself in such a job, it is rarely worthwhile to point this out to other people.
My first experience with this was as an intern at a large corporation after my first year of college. A few weeks in, the Vice President told me he had a special project for me. He wanted me to spend the next couple of weeks going through boxes of documents. Rumor had it that one of the boxes contained a record of the repair work the company performed on one of Amelia Earhart’s planes. At first, it felt cool to be working on this project for one of the leaders of the organization, but the excitement quickly faded as my fingers dried out several days into my search through the boxes.
When I tried to talk about the incredible amount of time I was wasting on this project, people quickly redirected my inquiry, saying, “It may suck, but you’re getting something to put on your resume!” or “Everyone has to work, what are you supposed to do?” or “You should be grateful for being paid.” No one wanted to grapple with this fundamental question: “Why the hell are so many grown adults spending their time on obviously pointless tasks?”
During my second internship at the same company in a different department, I shared a cubicle with a man in his 50s who spent five to six hours a day surfing the web and printing out articles about celebrities. One of the other interns brought a pillow and took daily naps in an abandoned cubicle in another area of the building. I had studied advanced math and physics thinking I would apply those skills, but instead I spent my summers doing simple math on Excel spreadsheets. The notion of spending the rest of my life doing mindless busywork horrified me and motivated me to keep searching for better options. It’s also what drove me to try to break into strategy consulting where I wouldn’t have to spend so much time proving I was willing to do things I didn’t believe in.
Yet at McKinsey, proving your commitment to work came in a different flavor. The work was much more interesting, but it seemed that people were in an endless search to do more. In my first week on the job, my manager told me that I was expected to work 40–50 hours a week and I took her at her word. Yet most of my colleagues worked 50 to 60 hours a week or more.
My colleagues always laughed when I left the office at 5:30. “Paul can get away with it, he’s just different,” they would say. I thought I was simply more efficient and worried a little less. The reality was that I never bought into the wage‑based mentality and could never fully commit to placing work at the center of my life.
Eventually, something would have to break.

4
Awakening
The ultimate way you and I get lucky is if you have some success early in life, you get to find out early it doesn’t mean anything. – David Foster Wallace
I had no master plan to quit my job. Even now, several years after doing so, when people ask about my journey, I’m more confused than you might expect. Choosing to leave full‑time work was not a single bold decision but a slow and steady awakening that the path I was on was not my path.
It’s tempting to tell a simpler story. People want to hear about bold acts of courage, not years of feeling lost. On my way toward leaving my job, I never had a clear picture of my next step. Experiencing this makes it easy to spot these kinds of phases in other people’s stories and I’ve done my best to highlight them in my writing and podcast.
My conclusion from this is simple: beyond the headlines of dramatic life changes are almost always longer, slower, and more interesting journeys.
Pebble in My Shoe
As I recovered from my health challenges, I entered a phase of restlessness typical of anyone that eventually makes a life change.
A friend, Khe Hy, provides a perfect description of this phase. Fifteen years into a successful career in finance, he walked away to find a new path. However, it took him a long time to make that decision. He reflected, “It definitely wasn’t a sudden realization. It’s a little bit like having a pebble in your shoe, where you’re walking and something is off, and it’s mildly uncomfortable.”45
When he got raises or promotions the discomfort would subside but never disappear. Slowly, he became more curious about that feeling and realized that despite his external success, he had become a “passive participant” in his life. Eventually, this convinced him to embark on his own pathless path.
When I returned to work after regaining my health, I had discomfort that could only be described the way Khe put it, as a pebble in my shoe. It wasn’t enough of a feeling to make me do anything dramatic, but it threw me off just enough that I was forced to pay attention to my life in a different way.
As I started to pay attention, I slowly came to realize the reality that I had been living in was an invisible bubble, one of my own creation. I started to push the edges of that reality and wasn’t sure what would happen.
A Daily Reminder
If there are clear boundaries to behavior within a given field of endeavor, then there is also great freedom to adapt and imagine within those lines. These boundaries, however, should always be tested to see if they are actually still real. It takes conscious acts by individuals to test these edges. – David Whyte
After returning to work, I felt like I had gone through a major transformation, but to my colleagues, I appeared back to normal. I was physically present but detached. Rather than participating in meetings as a good team member, I observed them as a visiting anthropologist. I saw my colleagues with new eyes. Are they happy? What kind of pain or challenges are they dealing with? Is this how they want to be spending their time?
Once you ask these questions there is no going back. Not because of the contradictions in other people’s lives, but because it makes it difficult to live in contradiction in your own life.
This inspired me to act. I wanted to design a career that worked for me and decided to start with a simple commitment, one inspired by a talk from Earl Jones, an MIT alumnus who had shared his leadership principles with my class in grad school. I remembered how he had a list of words that reminded him of what he values, something that popped up on his calendar every morning.
I followed his example and created a daily calendar entry of priorities for my life. First on my list was health. After recovering from my health challenges, I would do anything to stay healthy. Next, my head told me to list “career,” but my heart told me to list it last. This simple decision was my first conscious commitment to exploring the possibility of a life not centered around work. My final list included four items: health, relationships, fun & creativity, and career. Since 2013, this list pops up on my phone at 8:30 a.m. each morning.
Staring at those four items, in that order, was scary. Without knowing it, I had embraced a question that would shape my decisions: “How do you design a life that doesn’t put work first?”
The answer, my dear reader, is simple. You start underachieving at work.
You stop setting an alarm and you cancel morning meetings because the energy gained is worth fighting for. You start working remotely on Fridays without asking because the extra 24 hours with your grandmother is worth it. You start taking naps at the office because there’s a nap room and someone has to use it, right?
I felt like a rebel, like I was doing something wrong. At the same time, I had the sense that taking ownership of my life in this way, especially to prioritize my health, was something worth doing.
Instead of being consumed with thoughts about work and my next step, I had time to continue to experiment, and in the space that emerged, a creative energy entered which started to become a central force in my life.
A Fool’s Journey
Creativity requires faith. Faith requires that we relinquish control. – Julia Cameron
As I started to test my boundaries, I split into two different versions of myself. One, “Default Path Paul,” focused on continuing my career, looking for the next job. The other, “Pathless Path Paul,’’ was finding his footing and starting to pay attention to the clues that were showing up. Clues that would lead me not to another job, but to another life.
The first time I acted on one of these clues was during a conversation with a career coach in Boston. She shared how much she loved what she did. Her infectious energy made me want to know more.
One benefit of having learned to be a world‑class hoop-jumper is being able to support friends. Most people hate thinking about career decisions, and I have always volunteered to help anyone that asked. I told the coach how much I enjoyed this and said that maybe one day I could do what she was doing. She looked at me quizzically and said, “it sounds like you’re already a coach, though?”
Her comment rocked me. She urged me to try coaching as a side gig. I spent the next few minutes making excuses for why this was not possible but I think I had been waiting for someone like her to push me in a new direction. I finally had somewhere to direct my emergent creative energy and I told her that I accepted the challenge.
It would be a while until I “launched” the career coaching experiment, but I got to work immediately. I started by building a website, Careerswithpaul.com, and writing several articles about why I enjoyed helping people with careers. I tinkered with this project for several months and lost myself in the flow of work at my desk, sneaking in a few hours whenever I could. I’d go home and keep working on it. This phase of writing and creating was thrilling. It was a sharp contrast with my day job where I was working hard, but only in safe, predictable ways.
Instead of announcing this work to the world, however, Default Path Paul had orchestrated another job change, a position in New York City helping to build a consulting practice that provided services to CEOs and board members of large companies. Despite the obvious shift in my interests and energy, I was still searching for that elusive dream job and had not yet considered becoming self-employed.
There was no dream job to be found but as soon as I moved to New York, the energy of the city supercharged every other aspect of my life. I started exercising, wearing better clothes, and feeling more confident. On the coaching front, I joined a two‑year mentorship program for first-generation college students and finally sent an email announcing the career coaching side gig to 100 of my closest friends and family. Sending that email was terrifying because it was like a coming-out party for Pathless Path Paul, a side of me that I had previously kept hidden.
I landed my first two paid coaching clients, and I loved the challenge of doing something new and on my own. It led me to do many more experiments. Over the next year, I launched a group coaching workshop, created an online course on resumes, started sharing my writing publicly, helped several clients navigate career and life shifts, and was even invited to give two paid talks on careers.
My view of the world was shifting and it was both exciting and disorienting. Austin Kleon, a prolific creator and writer, says that “creative work runs on uncertainty; it runs on not knowing what you’re doing.”46 The creative work of finding a new life path is similar. I acknowledged as much in that email announcing my coaching work: “So here I am. I’m going to pursue this on the side and I wanted to share it with you first. Do I know where this will take me? No, but I’m excited to find out.”
I took more responsibility for my life and started questioning my beliefs about work. When we talk about our jobs we often say, “I’m learning a lot!” In the first few years working in consulting, this was true. I grew in so many areas: writing, giving better presentations, communication skills, and research. A few years into the path, however, the things I was incentivized to learn became specific to the organization, such as navigating political conflicts and adopting behaviors, dress, and attitudes that signaled I might be a future company leader. I sucked at these things and my motivation tanked.
Daniel Vassallo describes experiencing a similar shift ten years into his career at Amazon: “Everything was going well and getting better. But despite all this, my motivation to go to work each morning was decreasing – almost in an inverse trend to my career and income growth.” He came to the conclusion that “only intrinsic motivation lasts” and decided to leave a comfortable six‑figure salary behind and create a life designed around flexible work, his interests, and his family.47
My lack of motivation at work made it easy to stay focused on my side projects despite not knowing where they were headed. The only way through this kind of uncertainty is to embrace what author and educator George Leonard called “the spirit of the fool.” He argued that when you start learning anything new it will make you “feel clumsy, that you’ll take literal or figurative pratfalls. There’s no way around it.”48
I liked feeling like a fool and the excitement that comes with learning something new. The only problem? I was miserable at my job.
Pushing Forward
It took a year and a half for me to admit I did not enjoy my job. I had spent years crafting an idea of who I thought I should be and working hard to find jobs that matched this idea. It was hard to admit that the foundation that I thought I had been building was incredibly fragile.
The first time I voiced an intention to “go work on my own’’ was in an annual performance evaluation with my manager. In a high‑rise office overlooking the skyscrapers in New York, I acknowledged that I might be in the wrong place. He said something about me struggling to embrace the culture, and instead of arguing with him, I confessed, “My heart isn’t in it.”
I told him about my experiments with coaching and how the excitement I felt outside of work contrasted with the growing cynicism and frustration I experienced at work. For the first time, I was honest with my manager and with myself. As I shared my reflections, I blamed myself, and unexpectedly, I lost the ability to speak, finding myself on the verge of tears. While I didn’t know it then, this was the first step toward letting go of my deep attachment to the default path.
I returned to my office and sat at my desk, staring blankly at my screen. If you had told me when I was building that spreadsheet of dream jobs during college that not only would I work for several of those companies, but also directly with some of the most famous CEOs in the world, I would have been shocked. But I also would have thought that was exactly what I wanted.
As I sat there, I didn’t know how to want it anymore.
I had been hired to help build a consulting division. The success I achieved in my first year earned me a raise and I was asked to develop a proposal for a new career path for our growing group. At the time, I felt like I had a future at the company. In my second year, I started working on an internal project meant to take three months. As it dragged on for more than a year, however, things started to fall apart. I became frustrated with the snail’s pace and that’s when the pebble in my shoe feeling became too powerful to ignore.
From my perspective now, I had no future at the company, and by the time I had that conversation about my performance with my manager, things were already headed south. Yet I was still working hard on my proposal for promotion, outlining a multi‑year career path for my position. Based on the experiences of others who leave the default path, this stage of contradiction is common. You take a last stand, doubling down on the existing path despite all evidence that it is no longer working.
My biggest barrier was my inability to imagine an alternative life. My creative experiments were exciting, but they didn’t suggest an obvious next step. It was easier to aim toward another raise or promotion than daring to ask myself deeper questions.
A passage from William Reilly’s book How To Avid Work, published in 1949, captures my reality at the time:
Your life is too short and too valuable to fritter away in work.
If you don’t get out now, you may end up like the frog that is placed in a pot of fresh water on the stove. As the temperature is gradually increased, the frog feels restless and uncomfortable, but not uncomfortable enough to jump out. Without being aware that a chance is taking place, he is gradually lulled into unconsciousness.
Much the same thing happens when you take a person and put him in a job which he does not like. He gets irritable in his groove. His duties soon become a monotonous routine that slowly dulls his senses. As I walk into offices, through factories and stores, I often find myself looking into the expressionless faces of people going through mechanical motions. They are people whose minds are stunned and slowly dying.49
My path was suffocating part of me that I wanted to let breathe.
I had to do something.
What Am I Worth?
Even though I had said I wanted to work “on my own,” based on my actions, I wasn’t there yet. In the months after I sat in my manager’s office on the verge of tears, I did what I always did when I felt frustrated. I started looking for another job. I still thought the perfect job was just around the corner.
Another consulting firm in New York seemed to offer a way forward. I read a book by the firm’s founder outlining a new way of running a company centered around self‑organization. The ideas excited me. After a number of great interviews with the firm, I reached the phase of an interview when you are about to receive an offer. Typically, I would be telling myself a story about how it was the perfect next step in my career. This time things felt different. The leader of the team called me to discuss the details. He was direct, “We want you to join our team, but we can only offer you $50,000 less than you make now.”
This was a blow to the ego. I was worth more. Definitely $50,000 more.
He argued that since I was passionate about the work, it was worth taking a pay cut. I pretended that this was reasonable and told him I needed a few days to think about it. I hung up the phone and sat there. I was rattled. What the hell was I doing? Was I really trying to find work I cared about or was I just trying to move forward like I always did?
The low salary offer was a blessing in disguise. It forced me to think about money. Making more money was not one of the priorities on the list I read on my phone every morning, so why was I so attached to what I thought I was worth?
In 2008, attorney Kenneth Feinberg was appointed to a position in which he set the salaries of bank executives involved in the global financial crisis. He had to inform executives who made $5 million the previous year that they would only be making $1 million in the upcoming year. He expected them to be frustrated but understand, given the broader challenges in the economy. That’s not what happened. Most were outraged. He realized that “these corporate officials viewed their compensation as the sole barometer of self-worth.” He wasn’t lowering their salaries; he was dealing a blow to the essence of who they thought they were.50
I claimed not to care about money, but the truth was that I was more like those executives than I thought.
I turned down the offer and started to ask harder questions. Why was I trying to get a raise when I knew I was not in a good environment? What was I seeking? Why did I keep changing jobs every two years? What was that pebble in my shoe really telling me?
These questions inspired an idea: what if I paired making less with working less?
I started to imagine a new path. Why not attempt to do the work I wanted to do as a freelancer while also having more flexibility and control over my life?

5
Breaking Free
Some people inherit values and practices as a house they inhabit; some of us have to burn down that house, find our own ground, build from scratch, even as a psychological metamorphosis. – Rebecca Solnit
Not Who I Wanted To Be
After rejecting the job offer, I took time to reflect on what I wanted. I revisited a letter I had written for a leadership class during business school. In it, I defined a leader broadly as someone that could be a “role model in all aspects of their life.” I specifically listed nine principles, a collection of phrases, quotes, ideas, and beliefs that I hoped to embody throughout my career. Some examples included a desire to lead with empathy, to embrace humility, to inject humor wherever possible, to avoid becoming too serious, to prioritize learning, to think independently, and to create memorable experiences for others through my work.
I decided to turn this into a self-assessment and reviewed each of the nine principles, scoring myself on a scale of one to ten. A few areas earned low scores. First, my curiosity and passion for learning at work were nonexistent. Second, I was struggling to think independently in a positive way. I was becoming cynical and confrontational rather than looking for ways to have a positive impact. Finally, I had become too serious about work. At some point, I had lost my sense of humor and was spending far too much time getting caught up in company politics.
Simply put, I was a curmudgeon at work, increasingly cynical about the intentions of leaders, not learning anything beyond the latest office gossip.
Deep down I knew these things, but I hadn’t chosen to face what I knew. Putting a score on a page showed me that I was struggling to become the kind of person I thought I could be. Jerry Colonna, an investor turned executive coach, asks his clients this question, “How are you complicit in creating the conditions you say you don’t want?” After the reflection, I knew that I was complicit. I also knew that if I wanted things to change, it was solely up to me.
In business school, I created a vision of the kind of leader and person I wanted to be, and five years later I realized I was headed in the wrong direction. When I wrote that paper, my model of the world was one in which my principles would triumph over my environment. If those principles still mattered to me, which they did, I needed to get more creative about how I could bring them forth in my life and career.
Email from Sarasota
“I think it’s time to move on.”
I wrote that sentence in a hotel room in Sarasota, Florida. I had just arrived for the weekend to attend a friend’s wedding. I opened my laptop to check work emails before heading down to the pool and saw several emails from my manager.
There was nothing special about those emails, but that day I couldn’t pretend to care about the latest client crisis. Anyone who has worked in client or customer‑facing jobs knows that the work mostly focuses on reacting to ongoing mini‑crises. Almost everyone agrees that these issues are not all that important, but almost no one can stop themselves from reacting to each one with equal enthusiasm and panic.
I told my manager that I found his emails unnecessarily aggressive. He disagreed and we argued a bit back and forth. At the end of one exchange, I added, “I think I should move on.”
He interpreted this remark as a formal resignation and had probably been expecting this moment since I had choked up in his office. I had no conscious intention to quit right then, but I couldn’t muster up a single ounce of energy to tell him otherwise.
I sat in my hotel room and didn’t know what to think. I could stop what I had set in motion, but I didn’t. I felt excited but confused. Did I just quit? I walked down to the pool to start the wedding weekend, saw a friend, and said, “I think I just quit my job.”
So much of life is like this. We are surprised at the moment something happens, but looking back, we realize that everything makes sense. Losing my grandfather, getting rejected from jobs repeatedly, never finding the right fit, facing health challenges and hard questions were all events that sent me in an inevitable direction that was only obvious upon reflection.
When I quit, it was the only thing left to do. It took me 10 seconds at the bottom of an email.
Commuting in the Blob
I stayed in the job for three months to train my replacement and help the team transition. It was about three months too long.
No single day stands out. I stuck to my daily routine, arriving each morning at the 7 train subway platform. I boarded the train for the single-stop journey from Queens to Manhattan. Then I slid my body into the masses of people and became part of a massive blob of workers making our way into the mecca of work.
Each day I searched for signs of life. I would force a smile and look around to see if anyone noticed. No one ever did. So I gave up and adopted the neutral uninterested smirk that everyone seemed to understand was the proper way to be.
When we pulled into Grand Central, the blob became active with people jockeying for position to embark on their unique paths through the labyrinth of stairs and tunnels. I had my own special route and knew the speed and angles to make it to my desk as fast as possible. On my first day at this job, the first time I had worked in New York City, I paused and took a deep breath as I walked through the center of the station. It felt special. It was special. Now I wanted no part of it, but each morning I continued to go through the motions.  The building I worked in, now known as the MetLife building, was built next to Grand Central Station in 1963 and was universally panned at the time. Architecture critic Ada Louise Huxtable called it “a lesson in how to be mediocre without really trying.”51
Twenty stories up in that building was my office, its furnishings dating back to the 1970s or 1980s. The offices of the senior partners, still mostly men, were located along the building’s outside walls. Decades after the offices had been built, their positions and sizes were still clear markers of importance. My small office was a step up from the cubicles, but I was still years away from having a real office. I always appreciated the clarity of these distinctions. So many companies seem afraid to make these power dynamics visible, disguising them behind open offices and casual dress codes.
In those final months, I was in a liminal space between two worlds. I had decided to take a leap to a different path but had not yet changed direction. I struggled to process how I was feeling, held captive by accumulated frustration and anxiety. When I thought about my future, everything came up blank. I did my best to pretend I knew what I was doing, but for the first time in my life, I was operating without a script.
Was I doing the right thing?
It didn’t really matter. There was no turning back. I was embarking on a new path, and I had no choice but to find out. As the final day at work approached, I pretended to be excited, but I was merely existing, one day at a time.
Too Smart for Burnout
I told myself I was smarter than other people. I knew what I was good at. I always took all of my vacation days. Didn’t work crazy hours. Made time for friends and family. Changed jobs when I stopped learning. I had done all these things with the idea that this was how I would not only avoid burning out but that I would thrive. I wanted to hack the system and make it work for me. On my final day of work the feelings that flowed through my body told me I wasn’t so clever.
The first day after leaving my job I started my day like any other, waking up and making coffee. Our apartment in Long Island City had a beautiful view of the Manhattan skyline. My roommate and I had decided to move there six months prior, hoping to upgrade our apartment for the same rent we had been paying in Manhattan. It was a beautiful space. Yet as I looked out at the skyscrapers where I had been working just a day earlier, it felt weird. I was suddenly an outside observer not yet able to make sense of what I had left behind.
I spent the next couple of hours wandering around the apartment, eventually sat down, and opened my computer. Something told me I needed to write and as soon as I started typing, an emotional flood of energy took over my body. Years of resentment, frustration, and confusion demanded to be released.
While working, I always sensed that these feelings were there, but the daily inertia of a life centered around work kept them hidden. Now, without a plan and without anywhere to show up, I had to feel the full force of my emotions.
I gained my composure and kept writing. The words seemed to flow from my heart and as I got about halfway down the first page a word came out that surprised me.
Burnout.
I couldn’t be burnt out. I was too smart! Burnout is for investment bankers and lawyers working every weekend and logging 80‑hour weeks. I tried to explain it away but I couldn’t. This was the only word that seemed to capture the brokenness I had felt over the previous year.
The word burnout was coined in the 1970s by Herbert Freudenberger, an American psychologist who studied workers in free health clinics. He found that the prime candidates for burnout were those who were “dedicated and committed,” trying to balance their need to give, to please others, and to work hard. He noticed that when there was added pressure from superiors, people often hit a breaking point.52
Throughout the 1980s, burnout was studied across most types of work and by the end of the decade, there were hundreds of definitions. Freudenberger seemed distraught by this fact but still wanted to understand what might cause burnout. He was intrigued by Professor Cary Cherniss’ definition of burnout as “the bureaucratic infringement on a professional’s autonomy” and thought that the right way to think about burnout was to focus on the disconnect between an individual and the culture of the company in which they worked.53
This also meant that burnout might be unavoidable which motivated Freudenberger to ask two provocative questions:
What if the value system of the institution is diametrically opposed to the values, ethics, and competencies of the individual professional?
What if the individual professional seeks to live up to the external, organizationally imposed criteria of what constitutes success and achievement, but is unable to do so?
These questions still linger in our workplaces, and in the years since Freudenberger asked them, our economy has continued to shift towards the type of helping professions that are similar to the workers he studied in the health clinics.
People dedicate themselves to being “good workers,” and being successful means keeping clients, customers, and managers happy while fitting into a company’s cultural norms. Unfortunately, success for the company does not always align with what is best for the person, and over time, a disconnect can emerge. This is what happened to me.
At that last job, I wasn’t a team player and I could have tried harder to say the right things, dress the right way, or spend more time pleasing my manager. But I couldn’t do it. The norms of the organization were pulling me too far away from the person I wanted to be and the energy I used to manage this disconnect undermined anything good I had to offer.
A German report on burnout found that when burned out, people “may start being cynical about their working conditions and their colleagues…” and may “…distance themselves emotionally and start feeling numb about their work.”54 This is the tricky thing about burnout.  If you are suffering from burnout, you are likely not thriving at work, and over time it’s easy to see yourself as the cause. Add to this the common assumption that you should never leave a job too soon and you get a world in which millions of people are experiencing the slow, marginal creep of burnout and have no way out.
Luckily, I found my way out and as I finished writing the piece, I felt a sense of relief wash over my body. I was able to forgive myself for some of my failures in that job and with that, I was ready to move forward.
The Dynamics of Mourning
But under the hardness of that armor there is the tenderness of genuine sadness.
– Pema Chodron
To celebrate leaving my job I decided to take an extended trip to Europe. As I was booking the flights, I initially typed in dates two weeks apart, but then realized I had no obligations to return to. Before this trip, I had never traveled anywhere for more than two weeks. As I extended the dates to five weeks on the booking app, sirens sounded in my head. This was the first of many experiences in which I pushed past the default setting of how I was supposed to be living.
In the first week, I watched an incredible sunset in Florence, sharing a cheap bottle of wine with a friend I had met from Ecuador earlier that day. As the colors exploded over the city, I was filled with joy and excitement about the new adventure in front of me.
The next day, however, I woke up with one of the worst colds I’ve ever had. It was as if my body was saying, “not so fast!” Professor Freudenberger noted in his research that for some people, burnout involves the “dynamics of mourning” due to dealing with the “loss of something within yourself, something you treasured and valued, your ideals.”55 Freudenberger argued that recovering from burnout involves a grieving process to let go of those ideals. I had not factored this into my journey and did not expect how hard it would hit me in that first month. I settled into a slower pace as my trip through Europe shifted from a celebration to rest and recovery.
On the final weekend of my trip, I spent the July 4th holiday in the small village of Praiano on the Amalfi Coast in Italy. A few people I had met at a dinner the night before joined me at the beach. One woman was a successful designer working at IDEO in Chicago and we started talking about why I had left my job. I told her I was excited about having space to experiment, explore ideas, and not have to work for someone else. She was confused and asked, “why not just find another job?”
A year earlier I would have shared my career ambitions and added her on LinkedIn. But instead, I answered, “Good question, I’m not sure.” I was living in the present, taking it one day at a time. It felt good. I was also nervous.
I was heading back to the United States, and I would have to see if I could turn those intentions into reality.
Fool with a Sign
Reality was waiting in New York. I had quit my job and didn’t have any work lined up. After ten years of being on the default path, I felt exposed.
Living in New York City didn’t help. Being in one of the most expensive cities in the world, the pressure to make money was intense. When I was getting paid on a steady basis, the relationship between making money and my motivation was hard to understand. Without a paycheck, the combination of insecurity, fear, and my desire to prove myself made it much clearer. This ignited a period of frenzied activity, one which I’ve noticed is a common stage for people that leave their jobs without an income.
I started proactively pursuing freelance projects and said yes to every opportunity. The first gig was one that paid me $1,000 to walk around New York City, find people wearing Allbird brand shoes, and ask them four questions. On my first day, I struggled to find people by randomly walking around the city. On day two, I took a different approach, buying a large cardboard sign and writing in big letters, “Do you own Allbirds?” I held up the sign at the farmer’s market in Union Square Park and started finding people. Despite some embarrassment, I was able to laugh at myself and have fun with it. Being a fool with a sign landed me my first paycheck and it also helped serve as a ritualistic shift away from a life of dress shirts and formalities to one that was a little more free.
I landed a more substantial project a few months later working with a former professor launching a non‑profit in Boston. As I signed the contract, I made the first substantial dent in the fear that I would fail. What a relief! I even ended up landing a few smaller projects and in one of the months, I made more in a single month than I did in any month I had as an employee. The project in Boston also convinced me to move from New York back to Boston, helping to cut down on my cost of living. These things all gave me a lot of confidence that my experiment to work on my own was something that had potential, and I started to ease into my journey.
As my money anxieties receded, I realized I wanted to go deeper. Not with freelance work, but in my life. In those first six months, I experienced a remarkable sense of freedom and ownership over my life. Most days I decided when, where, and how I worked. It differed radically from how I had spent my days on my previous path and this made me curious enough to consider a question that would push me deeper into an exploration of my relationship to work.
Am I a Worker?
During the first few months of self-employment, I read an article that jolted my reality.  Titled, “If work dominated your every moment, would life be worth living?” the philosopher Andrew Taggart offered a powerful question that spoke to the underlying tension I lived with for most of my adult life.
By my late 20s, I had oriented my entire life around work.  I was always thinking about how I could get a better job or a higher salary. I had launched a side gig helping people navigate their careers and started writing about how the working world could be better.  I could only afford my expensive New York City apartment because I was earning a high income, and my social life was spent with similarly high‑earning friends.
At the time I could not imagine any other existence.  Where I lived, what I did, how I thought about money, and the people I hung out with were all connected with my work identity. But if someone had asked me if work took over “every moment” of my life, I would have declared “not me!”
Yet when I became self‑employed, I was surprised at how strongly I had internalized a worker identity. As I struggled to find my first project, I felt guilty when I wasn’t working during typical work hours Monday through Friday. When I started working remotely on my first project, I had 100% control over when and how I did the work, but quickly fell into a routine of going to a coworking office five days a week. Many self‑employed people are surprised to find that once they no longer have to work for anyone else, they still have a manager in their head.
As I started to experiment with how I spent my time, Taggart’s question remained in my head. I was fascinated by his claim that we lived in a time of “total work,” a state of existence in which work is such a powerful force that almost everyone ends up identifying as a worker first and foremost. The idea of total work was inspired by the German philosopher Josef Pieper, who first wrote about it in his book Leisure, The Basis of Culture. Writing in Germany after World War II, Pieper was shocked at how people were eager to throw themselves into work without pausing to reflect on what kind of world they wanted to build. To Pieper, this was evidence that German society had abandoned a connection to a traditional form of leisure.56
Pieper argued that for most of history, leisure was one of the most important parts of life for people in many cultures. He noted that the ancient Greek translation for “work” was literally “not‑at‑leisure.” In Aristotle’s own words, “we are not‑at‑leisure in order to be‑at‑leisure.” Now, this is flipped. We work to earn time off and see leisure as a break from work. Pieper pointed out that people “mistake leisure for idleness, and work for creativity.” To Pieper, leisure was above work. It was “a condition of the soul,” and the “disposition of receptive understanding, of contemplative beholding, and immersion – in the real.”57
As I embraced the freedom of self‑employment, I was opening up to this kind of leisure but was also still dealing with the lasting power of a world of total work that I had fully embraced, one where my perceived value was derived from my ability to keep working. Yet Taggart’s question remained a daily companion:
“If work dominated your every moment, would life be worth living?”
My answer was becoming a clear “no,” but I didn’t know what this meant for my life. Eventually, I reached out to Taggart directly and he proposed three more specific questions:
Are you a worker?
If you are not a worker, then who are you?
Given who you are, what life is sufficient?
While these questions were terrifying, I was ready to start asking them seriously. According to Taggart, living in a world dominated by total work undermines the “playful contemplation concerned with our asking, pondering and answering the most basic questions of existence.”58 As I gained confidence on my new path, I was starting to be able to ask these questions and was open to the possibilities that were about to emerge.
Possibility
After six months of freelancing, I had a nice ending point for several projects and decided to design my own non‑work sabbatical. I abandoned the responsibility of being a “worker” and instead woke up each morning and did what I felt like doing. Most days I woke up without an alarm clock, worked out when I felt like it and wandered around the city on what used to be “normal“ workdays. For the first time, I was able to deeply know the type of leisure that Pieper wrote about.
This was also confusing. When people asked how my work was going, I offered a hand‑wavey response, trying to hide my guilt of pursuing such a radical experiment.
Yet my excitement for life grew and my curiosity soared. I felt drawn to creative projects again as I had been in New York. One was a blog. For months I had intended to bring together the writing I had been doing under the name of “Boundless,” but had been distracted by freelance work. With time and a nudge from my friend Greg, I finally launched the site as well as a podcast of the same name. I didn’t intend to make money with these projects which still felt like the “wrong” approach, but I was finding work I really enjoyed doing. I was having fun.
For the first time, I was living the intentions I had set years earlier that popped up every day on my phone: health, relationships, fun & creativity, and career. In my official, public story I was doing freelance consulting, but really I was taking my first sabbatical, learning how it felt to live life not oriented around work.
My projects started to transcend my understanding of work. In my life as a full‑time employee, work was a Monday through Friday thing I tried to minimize. Now it didn’t matter when I worked on my projects. They were energizing and rarely left me drained. For a long time, I had thought that if I wanted to be happier with my work, I just needed a better job. Now I saw that I just wanted a different relationship with work, one that, at least for now, didn’t come with a paycheck.
A lot of our confusion around work results from ideas like meaningful work and the widespread belief that we can always make money doing something we love. The blogger Marc Winn supercharged this idea in a viral meme. Winn translated a diagram created in 2011 by Andrés Zuzunaga and replaced the Spanish word for “purpose” with “Ikigai.”59 In Winn’s version, finding your Ikigai means aligning what you love, what you are good at, what the world needs, and what can be paid for.60  You can see these two diagrams here:
While many people have embraced this version of Ikigai, having discovered work I love doing that doesn’t come with a paycheck, I’ve realized that it’s wishful thinking. Plus, in Japanese, Ikigai is none of these things. Rather, its best translation is simply that it is a “reason for being” or “something to live for.”61 Similar to expectations around meaningful work, far too many people limit their imagination of work worth doing to things that either come with a paycheck, require qualifications, or have a socially accepted story of impact.
If I limited myself in the same way I would have lost all energy to continue. For me, I was finding that the act of creation was the reward itself. The philosopher Erich Fromm has argued that “creative union,” or when “man unites himself with the world in the process of creation,” is a way to experience love.62 I would have thought this completely absurd if I had not felt the depths of my connection to the world in those months.
After a few months of this, I was completely open to the world yet also starting to worry about eventually needing to make money again. Despite this, I had booked another month-long trip, this time to Asia. About a week before the trip, an opportunity emerged, one that would expand my own imagination about what was possible on my path.
A freelance recruiting company called me a week before the trip about an urgent client request to help them build a consulting skills training program. At first, I was disappointed because it was a project I wanted to do. I told the person I was leaving and that he needed to find someone else. He urged me to apply regardless. I decided to come up with terms that I would say “hell yes!” if they agreed. I would work on the job for 10–15 hours a week, for double the rate I had been charging other clients, and I would do it from Asia. I expected them to quickly reject this but to my surprise, they said yes within an hour of sending my proposal.
Over the next few weeks, I worked in small bursts from a tiny Airbnb in government housing in Singapore, a luxury hotel in Kuala Lumpur, a café on a cliff in Bali, and the beach on an island in Thailand. In Bali, I commuted 30 seconds down the cliff from the $20 surfer hostel I had rented to the café. I opened my laptop and drank thick, Balinese coffee while watching surfers in the distance. This weird kind of life was only possible due to the internet, and I could not have imagined it even one month earlier.
In stepping away from my temporary identity as a freelance consultant, I let myself fully lean into what I would later call the pathless path. As I wandered Asia, my mind exploded with possibility. If it was possible to work from a laptop in Bali, what else had I not yet considered?
My imagination was open, and I was ready to see where it might take me.

6
The First Steps
The one who wonders not only does not know, he is intimately sure that he does not know, and he understands himself as being in a position of not‑knowing. But this un‑knowing is not the kind that brings resignation. The one who wonders is one who sets out on a journey, and this journey goes along with the wonder: not only that he stops short for a moment, and is silent, but also that he persists in searching. – Joseph Pieper
Prototype Your Leap
Our tendency to glorify and simplify stories of people quitting their jobs convinces far too many people that this move is only possible for uniquely courageous people.
My story is not one of courage, but of pragmatic and safe experiments, experiences, and questioning over several years. This approach, one of prototyping a change, is not only a better way to think about taking bold leaps but is quite common across many people’s stories.
I’ve developed a keen eye for seeing when there’s more to a story beneath its surface. For example, when I saw an article by author and designer John Zeratsky titled, “I Quit My Job to Sail Around Central America for 18 Months,” I knew immediately there was more. So I interviewed him for the podcast to find out just how he got to that point.
His story started several years earlier. He said, “before we left…we would take small sailing trips, we would go somewhere for one night…Later that year we would do that for a long weekend, then for a week, and then for two weeks. A couple of years before we left on the ‘big trip’ we went for two months.”63 It took several years and many smaller trips to decide that sailing for more than a year was something they definitely wanted to do.
This kind of approach, focused not on being brave, but instead on eliminating risk, is common for people who take unconventional paths. I hadn’t set out to prototype a life beyond full‑time work, but through freelance projects, coaching, paid speaking, writing, and connecting with people online, I achieved the same result. I knew what it felt like to work “differently” and make money on my own, and I learned to appreciate the “spirit of the fool” on an uncertain path. This was powerful because it helped me expand my perception of what I thought possible.
Diania Merriam had a similar experience in the years before she decided to leave her sales job. Her imagination was first sparked when she discovered the financially independent, retire early (FIRE) community. FIRE changed how she thought about money, which helped her get out of $30,000 of debt in 11 months. After that, she negotiated with her manager to work remotely, which enabled her to move to Ohio and buy a house.
Without debt, she felt less dependent on her job and after a successful year in her sales job, she requested a two‑month unpaid sabbatical instead of a pay raise.64 Her dream was to walk the Camino de Santiago, a famous pilgrimage in Spain. She was prepared to quit if her manager said “no,” but to her surprise, she said “yes” without much hesitation.
The trip was a powerful experience and her imagination continued to expand as she experienced more ownership over her life. These experiences inspired her to launch a conference called EconoMe for people like her who were reimagining the American Dream, and she continued to engage in many other projects beyond her job. A couple of years after launching the conference she was asked to help host a daily finance podcast. She was eventually offered a paid position to be the lead host. Although the pay was only one‑third of her salary at the time, she thought it was a “manageable risk” and decided to use it as an opportunity to finally quit her job and explore the full potential of self-employment.
Over several years, Diania was inadvertently prototyping new ways of living life. When she decided to quit, she already had some things she knew she wanted to work on such as her conference and an understanding of what it might feel like to live and work in a different way.
Doing even a small experiment is scary, but the payoff can be profound. When I hosted a group coaching session in New York, I was extremely nervous. I had never done anything like it before, but by the end of the night, I knew that bringing together curious people around questions I was excited to explore was something worth being uncomfortable for. The more experiments I’ve done, the more comfortable I have become, and this gives me more freedom to try new things without being afraid.
For most people, life is not based on all‑or‑nothing leaps of faith. That’s a lie we tell ourselves so that we can remain comfortable in our current state. We simplify life transitions down to single moments because the real stories are more complex, harder to tell and attract less attention. The headline, “Quits To Live on a Sailboat” seems more impressive and is easier to talk about than “Couple Slowly and Purposefully Tests Out a Life Transition while Aggressively Saving Money over Five Years.“ As a result, we hear fewer of the real stories, most of which include some kind of prototyping.
By experimenting with different ways of showing up in the world and making small, deliberate changes, we can open ourselves up to the unexpected opportunities, possibilities, and connections that might tell us what comes next.
Wonder Tips the Scales
Many people dislike some parts of their jobs. But they stay in their jobs because their suffering is familiar. To change would be to trade the known for the unknown and change brings discomfort in hard to predict forms. So people avoid change and develop coping strategies. They learn to sidestep the manipulative manager, or like me, change jobs every couple of years, plan vacations, stay busy, and get drunk during the weekend. Play this game long enough without becoming too burned out and you might end up getting promoted.
We can explain this strategy with a simple equation:
Uncertain Discomfort < Certain Discomfort + Coping Mechanism
In other words, given sufficient coping strategies, people will be willing to tolerate consistent levels of misery for long stretches of time. Is there anything that can override this? In my conversations with people who have made changes in their life, one thing seems to work reliably: wonder.
Wonder is the state of being open to the world, its beauty, and potential possibilities. With wonder, the need to cope becomes less important and the discomfort on the current path becomes more noticeable. The equation becomes:
Uncertain Discomfort + Wonder > Certain Discomfort
In thoughts about the future, worry is traded for wonder. People stop thinking about worst‑case scenarios and begin to imagine the benefits of following an uncertain path. They get curious about who they might become if they embrace discomfort and are filled with a sense of urgency that says, “if I don’t do this now, I might regret it.”
Michael Ashcroft had worked as a consultant in the energy sector for almost ten years when he decided to quit and become self‑employed. An experience with burnout motivated him to prototype different kinds of work that might enable him to leave his job like teaching online courses and coaching. Before he left his job, he told me, “I have a suspicion that a whole bunch of energy will get unlocked. I’ll just start doing things, and creating things and talking to people, and going to places…that I cannot fundamentally imagine right now, and it will be that stuff that shapes my life going forward…I am curious what else will show up.”65 He was able to take the leap because he had tapped into the power of wonder, enabling him to be excited about an uncertain future.
The travel writer Rolf Potts first experienced the power of possibility and wonder at the end of an eight‑month trip he took around the United States when he was young. It was the first time he “[let] the journey breathe” and embraced a slower pace of travel. He described a complete transformation: “Who I was before and after was best defined as I was uncertain before the trip and I was confident after the trip in terms of what the potential for life was.”66
I experienced a similar feeling after working remotely and traveling through Asia for that month. My path was more uncertain than ever, but the possibilities exploding in my mind overwhelmed any chance for my insecurity to take over.
One challenge to embracing possibility is knowing when to override what psychology professors Gilovich and Davidai call our “‘ought to’ self.” This is the voice that helps us follow through on commitments but can also keep us from making changes in our lives. This is the voice that might convince you that leaving a job is an abdication of responsibility. We “ought to” keep working. This impulse is helpful most of the time, but compounded over one’s life it stops us from moving towards what Gilovich and Davidai call our “ideal self.” When people reflect on their lives, these are the things that people regret most – not moving towards their ideal selves. The professors argue that people rarely regret the things they do in their lives. This is exactly because of the power of our “ought to” selves – even if we fail, we tend to take immediate action to fix those mistakes.67
The author Gretchen Rubin decided to override her “ought to” self when she said, “I’ve come to a point where I’d rather fail as a writer than succeed as a lawyer, and I need to try and fail or try and succeed, but I need to do it.”68 Rubin attended Yale Law School, clerked for Sandra Day O’Connor on the Supreme Court, and was at the start of a high‑paying and promising law career. Yet, she understood that if she kept going and never took a chance on becoming a writer, she would regret it.
Making life changes requires overcoming the discomfort of not knowing what will happen. Facing uncertainty, we make long mental lists of things that might go wrong and use these as the reasons why we must stay on our current path. Learning to have a healthy distrust of this impulse and knowing that even if things go wrong, we might discover things worth finding can help us open ourselves up to the potential for wonderful things to happen. Only when you reach this state are you at the same point as Rubin was, with no questions left about taking the next step. And don’t worry, even if you do screw up a little, your “ought to” self is standing by, ready to help make things right.
Seeing the World in a New Way
Opening yourself up to the possibilities for your life can help you decide to make a life shift, but it will not help you deal with the uncertainty of being on a path that others don’t fully understand.
In the months leading up to leaving my job and the year or two after quitting, I struggled to make sense of my journey. When others asked how I was doing, I felt compelled to give them proof that I had a plan and knew what I was doing. It was not until I found the philosopher Agnes Callard’s idea of an aspirational journey that I started to be more comfortable not knowing where I was headed.
Callard defines aspiration as the slow process of “trying on the values that we hope one day to possess.”69 This is in contrast to an ambitious journey where we already know what we value. For example, someone who wants to make a lot of money already values money. They don’t need to learn why they want it along the way. An aspirational journey is more ambiguous, and it is harder to predict what sort of values we will adopt along the way.
When we reflect, we find many examples of aspirational journeys in our lives. One example in my life is my love of basketball. When I was younger, I was obsessed with it. I played the sport, watched it, collected trading cards, and read books about the history of the game. I came to understand what I loved and valued about basketball only by continuing to stay interested. Now, when I watch a game and see an incredible play, it moves me in a way that I can’t quite articulate. To casual fans, this beauty remains hidden. I’ve never had any sort of outcome in mind with my love of basketball. Instead, it’s been a constant decision to continue to learn and stay engaged with the sport.
This journey contrasts with my pure ambition in college. I took classes with the sole intention of getting the best grade possible. I did not change radically as a person because nothing was at stake. I already valued good grades, which were proof to other people that I was succeeding at a certain kind of game. While ambition does not preclude aspiration, Callard argues that ambition “consumes much of an agent’s efforts and does not expand his value horizons.”70
Aspirational pursuits go hand in hand with the pathless path because they can appear incomprehensible to others and even yourself, sometimes for years. Callard argues that the aspirant’s understanding of the value of their pursuits “is characterized by a distinctive kind of vagueness, one she experiences as defective and in need of remedy.”71
Learning to exist with this vagueness is vital, especially at the earliest stages of making a change. It’s worth it though, because as Callard says, what is really at stake is you are “learning to see the world in a new way.”
Find the Others
According to Callard, people on aspirational journeys, or what I call the pathless path, are “characteristically needy people.” Because their worldviews are incomplete and evolving, they are dependent on the support of other people.
My family is filled with people who have thrived on the default path. I had many great role models who taught me the value of hard work, discipline, and commitment, but only on one kind of path. In addition, most of my friends were solidly committed to their full‑time jobs. When I was starting to think about taking a different path, I had to find inspiration from podcasts and social media where people like Seth Godin, Derek Sivers, and Tim Ferriss exposed me to a broader set of ideas of how to live and work.
The person I was most drawn to, Seth Godin, had built a life around creativity, generosity, and helping others. I didn’t know if I could be like Godin, but knowing that someone like him existed made me believe that kind of path was possible. One of the ideas that Seth Godin is known for is his suggestion that people on unconventional paths seek to “find the others.” These are the people who give us inspiration that doing things differently is possible and who might even join us on our journey.
It’s no surprise then that many people who take unconventional paths often grew up surrounded by people in their families who also took unconventional paths. Chris Donohoe worked in the consulting industry for several years before launching his own coaching business. He had always been inspired by “an entrepreneurial thread” in his family along with their “work for yourself mentality, and I’ve always had that as part of who I am.”72 For him, quitting to start his own business was natural.
Others find the others in unexpected places. Lydia Lee, who left a sales job in education in Canada, now runs an online coaching business from Bali and Canada. On a trip she took to Malaysia while still working full‑time, she met a digital nomad who was running a marketing firm from his laptop: “being able to meet him in real life…made me realize I could work from my laptop.”73 Meeting that person and her small, but powerful realization planted a seed in Lydia’s mind. Even though it would be another six months before she quit her job, she knew a different way of living was possible.
While Lydia happened upon this person by chance and I found people through social media, I suggest people take a more active approach to find what I call “path experts.” These are people ahead of you on a path you might be interested in taking. It could be someone who left a job like yours or someone exploring a way of living that fascinates you. Nine times out of ten these people will be enthusiastic about connecting with you because they are still searching for people to learn from on their own journey.
I like to joke that Seth Godin was my only friend on the path before I quit my job. I had read several of his books and devoured all of his podcasts. In today’s world, we are lucky to have an abundance of people sharing their stories with us. However, this kind of digital inspiration is often only helpful at the beginning of the journey. Ultimately, you need to find people who are open to a deeper friendship and willing to spend meaningful time together.
I was lucky to stumble upon a few people on the pathless path who would become these kinds of friends at a conference I attended only a few months after quitting my job. I met Noel Boyland, who left a promising consulting career in his early 40s after a health crisis. He’s since become the mentor and friend I reach out to when I’m struggling and need a dose of courage. I also met Nita Baum, a consultant, coach, and founder of a talent collective who led a workshop during the conference. In our first conversation, she seemed to know everything about me without needing to ask.  When you meet others on a similar path, there is an instant bond and a deep sense of knowing about the challenges you are both going through. You can smile in a way that says, ”I know, I know,” skip the “what do you do?” question, and start a deeper conversation.
On the pathless path, people like this are essential. You might find them in your family like Chris, while traveling like Lydia, or at a conference like I did. These relationships offer a space where you don’t need to have good answers for what you are doing or what comes next. Two “characteristically needy people,” as Callard describes them, isn’t a recipe for disaster. In my experience, it’s usually an opportunity for a beautiful friendship.
On my previous path, there was a hidden cost to my success. The consistent financial rewards helped me live a smooth existence, needing to rely less on others the more I succeeded. In some circles, this is celebrated as the ultimate aim of life, but for me it led to a certain emptiness that I didn’t fully understand until I found myself on a path that forced me to find the others.
Tame Your Fears
You can leave the default path before facing your fears, but the pathless path forces you to reckon with them no matter what. I’ve come to see this as a benefit and I’ve shifted from someone that kept my fears buried beneath the surface to being aware of my fears and seeing them as tiny but manageable existential crises that are an inevitable part of an uncertain journey.
Although people considering the option of leaving the default path can list hundreds of things that might go wrong, they struggle to talk about the fears behind those risks. In hundreds of conversations with people, I’ve found that these fears fall into one of the following five areas:
Success: “What if I’m not good enough?”
Money: “What happens if I go broke?”
Health: “What if I get sick?”
Belonging: “Will I still be loved?”
Happiness: “What if I am not happy?”
During my first few years of self‑employment, these fears overwhelmed me, but Tim Ferriss’ “fear setting” reflection exercise helped me reframe them and see fear in a completely new way.74
The exercise has six steps. The first four are straightforward:
Write down the change you are making.
List the worst possible outcomes.
Identify actions you could take to mitigate those actions.
List some steps or actions you might take to get back to where you are today.
Writing about fears has helped me transform abstract worries into concrete issues. When I wrote that I was afraid of going broke after I quit my job, I realized that there were fifty different things I could do to make money.
However, some fear‑related problems cannot be solved. The authors of Designing Your Life offer a helpful reframe, calling these issues “gravity problems” which are part of life “…but, like gravity, it’s not a problem that can be solved.”75 This phrase helps me sit with my discomfort when I worry about my health. Due to lingering health issues, I sometimes go long stretches with very little energy. Reminding myself that this is a fact of life, like gravity, helps me accept the uncertainties of life and the pathless path.
The final two questions of Ferriss’ exercise are the most powerful:
What could be some benefits of an attempt or partial success?
What is the cost of inaction in three months, 12 months, and in a few years?
This shifts the focus from the future, which is inherently uncertain, to the present, which helps us see our tendency to overestimate future costs and underestimate costs related to the status quo.
Bronnie Ware has taken care of many elderly people in the final stages of their lives. In a blog post titled, “Five Regrets of The Dying,” one of the most viewed online posts, she shared her reflections. The most common regret? Not staying “true to themselves” in their lives and focusing too much on what others expected of them.
The reason articles like this get so much attention is because they get to the heart of what matters to many people, how we spend our lives. Reflections from people at the end of their lives often share similar sentiments, yet very few people know to directly apply it to their lives. The pathless path, however, offers a unique invitation to grapple with our insecurities. If we can accept the invitation, we can continue to ask and then hopefully answer questions about what we really want.
Will They Still Love You?
I have talked with hundreds of people considering a change in their relationship to work or pursuing an alternative path, and one question consistently gets to the heart of their fears: “will the people in your life love you less if you do this?”  It’s a terrifying question, but worth considering because many people will override their own desires to meet the perceived expectations of others, such as a spouse or parent.
In my first year of self‑employment, I knew I wanted to stay on my path, but lacking Callard’s language of an aspirational journey, I didn’t know how to make any sort of compelling case for why this was true. I shied away from criticism and questions from others, fearful that they would throw me into self-doubt. To protect myself, I overcorrected and developed something my friend Visakan Veerasamy calls “preemptive defensiveness.” I saw myself in opposition to the world, seeing the simplest question as an attack on everything I stood for.
After my month-long trip to Asia and experiencing the possibility of working remotely, I had decided to move there for several months that fall. Yet, I hid this from my parents for more than two months despite putting in motion a plan to end my lease, sell most of my stuff, and return to Asia. In fact, they didn’t even find out from me, they heard it from my cousin. I was too scared of having the conversation.
A month before I left, I attended a wedding with my family and eventually faced the inevitable questions. At the hotel, everyone started asking: Why was I moving to Taiwan? Wasn’t I worried about healthcare? Would I ever have a “real job” again? Didn’t I want a family at some point? Why was I doing this? What was my long‑term plan?
I felt under attack and that I had disappointed the people that mattered most. My parents had sacrificed so much for me and I felt selfish. Now I know they were coming from a place of love and concern and didn’t want to see me suffer. But then, instead of sharing my own fear and uncertainty, I tried to convince them that my evolving vision of the pathless path was the best approach to life.
Unfortunately, the pathless path is an aspirational path and can never be fully explained, as Callard tells us, so attempts to convince people that you are moving in the right direction can be futile. People who value comfort and security often cannot understand why anyone would willingly pursue a path that increases discomfort and uncertainty.
This path offers profound personal growth, but its benefits often remain invisible to others. When you are on such a path, you are hyper‑aware of this disconnect, and this can cause a lot of distress. Amy McMillen, who took a year off after only a year in the workforce, recalls the questions that raced through her mind when she took an extended break from work a couple years into her career, “What will people think of me? I don’t even know what to think of me. Am I being completely irresponsible? Do my parents think I’m a failure? Are my friends as supportive as they seem, or do they think I’ve gone off the deep end?”76
But thinking through such questions can be helpful. In particular, I’ve found the question, “will the people in your life love you less?” powerful because it addresses the scariest and deepest issues. I didn’t want to disappoint my parents. I desperately wanted to convince them that I was doing the right thing. However, had I understood that I feared losing their love, I would have realized that the wiser response would have been to open up my heart and be vulnerable.
At peak uncertainty, I was about to step fully onto the pathless path when I headed halfway around the world to Taiwan. I brought several questions with me. I knew there might not be answers, but I sensed that there was something to be found.

II
The Pathless Path

7
Wisdom of the Pathless Path
August 31st, 2018 (My Newsletter) - In seven days, I’ll be boarding a flight to Taipei to begin a chapter in my life of living and working nomadically. As I’ve simplified my life and embraced minimalism, I noticed that I have had more time and have been in less of a rush to “do things,” giving me the chance to take routes that don’t make sense, go for random walks through the city and make time to have conversations I wouldn’t otherwise have. I feel so lucky and as I make the shift to Taipei, it seems much less a “vacation” or “trip” and much more an extension of an increased appreciation for life and the people in it.
* * *
The Life-Changing Magic of Non-Doing
I rolled out of my twin bed and made my way into the living room in the small Airbnb apartment I had booked for my first couple of months in Taipei. It was the fall of 2018 and I had just moved across the globe. I started the coffeemaker and thought about my day and my week. I realized that there was nothing to do.
Technically I was a self‑employed freelancer, but I didn’t yet have any clients. I had intentions of becoming what people refer to as a “digital nomad,” being able to work from anywhere in the world, but didn’t know how I would turn that into reality. I was also 33 years old, single, and had recently declared to my friends that I was giving up on dating and shifting to the “cool uncle” phase of my life.
But just a year later I would be planning a tiny wedding, figuring out how to grow the business I created, realizing that writing was an essential part of my journey, and most of all, trying to make sense of my new, deep appreciation for life. Rebecca Solnit supplies the words I didn’t have at the time:
That thing the nature of which is totally unknown to you is usually what you need to find, and finding it is a matter of getting lost.77
When I arrived in Taipei, I was lost in both the story of my life and in this new place where I couldn’t read the signs or speak the language. Yet I also felt I was exactly where I was supposed to be, my days filled with lightness and ease.
This feeling contrasted with the daily tension and low‑grade anxiety that I had experienced in New York and Boston over the previous ten years. In Taipei, that feeling evaporated and I started to experience a lighthearted playfulness that had remained dormant since I had wandered in the woods as a kid.
There’s a phrase in Chinese, “wu wei,” that describes how I felt. In English, its translation is “non-doing,” but not in the sense of doing nothing. Non-doing is not about escaping anything or being lazy but instead refers to a deep level of connectedness with the world. The Chinese philosopher Lao Tzu wrote about this more than 2,500 years ago in the Tao Te Ching: “Less and less do you need to force things until finally you arrive at non‑action. When nothing is done, nothing is left undone. True mastery can be gained by letting things go their own way. It can’t be gained by interfering.”78
More recently, John Steinbeck channeled this sentiment in a letter to his son, telling him, “If it is right, it happens—The main thing is not to hurry. Nothing good gets away.”79
In that first month in Taipei, I had stripped down my life to the bare minimum. I had few possessions, was releasing my grip on the future, and was opening myself up to the unknown. I spent these days shifting back and forth between the dizziness of feeling lost and the certainty that I was exactly where I was supposed to be.
Then an invitation to commit to the pathless path showed up.
My first date with Angie was at a tea house in Taipei. She would later tell me that she didn’t have high hopes. My dating app profile highlighted my past employers and my graduate school experience. She expected a world‑class hoop‑jumper. When she shared her frustration with her corporate career and said she’d rather spend her time reading, learning, and exploring the world, she thought I’d be disappointed. But she was wrong. I was falling in love.
On subsequent dates, including bike rides along the river, reading in the park, exploring night markets, and hiking, I discovered someone else who was asking the deeper questions and was willing to embrace uncertainty over doing what was expected. In other words, I had found someone fully embracing their own pathless path.
It’s a cliché to say that we find things exactly when we least expect them, but that’s exactly what happened to me. For years I had wanted to find someone to be able to “settle down” with. But I was looking for someone within the context of the default path, a script of how life should be rather than what I really wanted. I now agree with Joseph Campbell, who through his study of the human experience through our ancestors’ stories, concluded that “We must let go of the life we have planned, so as to accept the one that is waiting for us.”80
So I might add to Steinbeck’s advice: nothing good gets away, as long as you create the space to let it emerge.
Living in a world with infinite distractions and interesting goals can make it impossible to stop moving forward. Yet more than ever this is exactly what we crave, and in those first few months in Taipei, I started to see the wisdom in embracing a state of non‑doing. For most of my life, I had paired the idea of doing nothing with laziness. Living in another country enabled me to see that this was a very American way of seeing the world. In Taiwan, I was able to embrace a state of doing nothing that was not filled with anxiety and tension, but reflective and open. The possibilities that started to emerge at this time have changed my life. After more than three decades of constantly planning for the future, I was able to start living in the present.
Give Me a Break
The incommunicable trees begin to persuade us to live with them, and quit our life of solemn trifles. – Ralph Waldo Emerson
On his honeymoon, Mohit Satyanand, a successful corporate manager, turned to his wife and asked, “do we need to go back?” They decided not to. Instead, they moved to a small stone cottage in the Kumaon region of India and spent the next six years as he recounted, “in our garden in the forest, watching the peaches grow, and our son toddle.” 81
When they returned to the city to send their son to school, Mohit didn’t want to return to full‑time employment. Although his friends pushed him to get a “real job,” his taste of a different life convinced him to continue on the pathless path. He got by on part‑time assignments that “paid a fraction of a full‑time wage for someone of my age and training,” but it was enough.
I read Mohit’s story while in Taiwan heading in a similar direction, and I started to wonder if taking a break from work and embracing states of non‑doing were effective ways to improve life satisfaction. I was starting to realize a profound and positive shift in how I was thinking about my life and wondered if others had similar results.  I reached out to people who had taken such breaks and found that most people credited these breaks from work as one of the most important things in helping them see the possibilities in their life. I also started to notice that many of the shifts that people experienced were somewhat predictable. Four stand out:
First, people become aware of their own suffering. Often we don’t notice our drift into a state of low‑grade anxiety until we step away from what causes it, as I noticed the first day after I quit my job and realized I was burned out. After my friend, Kevin Jurczyk, took a planned sabbatical, he shared with me, “I used to think ‘this job isn’t so bad, I make enough money to make it worth it.’ Then you get a breath of freedom and realize, no, it may have been worth it at one point, but not anymore.”82
Similar frustrations with work inspired Jacqueline Jensen, a successful tech founder, to create a “structured sabbatical” to untangle her identity from her work. She asked herself, “What if I took work … working for a paycheck, what if I took that out of the center of my life, what would my life look like?” It was difficult, she says, “to untangle myself from all the things I get from work – the validation, the excitement.” 83 However, a month into her break she felt lighter and had a clearer view of what she wanted from work and life.
Second, curiosity re‑emerges. When people have time, they try new activities, revisit old hobbies, explore childhood curiosities, and start volunteering and connecting with people in their community. Edward, a friend and a doctor who has taken several sabbaticals, reflected that “new ideas often pop up and old topics of interest float back into my consciousness. I find myself writing notes and thinking more freely. This is the creative process, liberated by the neocortex now that the mind isn’t wholly occupied by the strain of everyday sustenance, the rat race, and the grind.”84
Third, people often desire to continue their “non‑work” journey. Lenny Rachitsky, who took a sabbatical after a long career in product management, thought he would return to work, “…but by the end of the break, it was crystal clear to me that I was ready to move on to a new adventure.” Several weeks into his sabbatical, he stopped checking his email: “My heart was no longer in the work. I didn’t yet know what I wanted to do next, but I knew it was time to shake things up.”85
Fourth, people write. When Alex Pang took a sabbatical after working in academia and the tech industry, he started to look at life differently, thinking, “maybe we had this idea about the relationship between working hours and productivity backward.”86 Based on that question alone, he spent the next several years writing and publishing several books about how rest and shorter workweeks might improve our lives.
Mohit, Kevin, Jacqueline, Edward, Lenny, Alex, and I were all surprised by how different life feels when it is not structured around work. We also became aware that our previous paths had kept the possibilities for our lives hidden, and in a short time, we started to recapture a youthful energy, one that enabled us all to take bold steps towards different kinds of lives.
Waiting for Retirement
The more we associate experience with cash value, the more we think that money is what we need to live. And the more we associate money with life, the more we convince ourselves that we’re too poor to buy our freedom. – Rolf Potts
One of the major barriers to taking a break is believing we have to wait for retirement.
Retirement was introduced in the late 1800s in Germany to provide support for the small number of people who survived to the age of 70 and could no longer work. Now people live longer and are healthier, so retirement is no longer rare, and in some countries, people are projected to spend up to one‑third of their life retired. This has led to enormous expectations that this period of one’s life will be happy, peaceful, and enjoyable. Part of this is driven by financial firms, which spend millions on advertising campaigns showing happy elderly people smiling as they walk through beautiful meadows. The message? Work hard and invest until you reach the “magical number.” Then you can stop and smell the roses.
This version of retirement is a core part of the default path and while it still works for some, the number of people who report being satisfied with retirement in an ongoing survey in the United States has been steadily falling for twenty years.87 Why might this be? Part of it is that when people stop working, they struggle to replace the meaning and joy they got from their work. I’ve talked with many people in their 60s and 70s who actively reject the idea that they should stop working. While they often don’t have full‑time jobs, they enjoy working part‑time, volunteering, learning new things, or finding other ways to contribute.
While the traditional idea of retirement is motivating for many, others might benefit from thinking about it from the perspective of the pathless path. On the pathless path, retirement is neither a destination nor a financial calculation, but a continuation of a life well-lived. This shifts attention from focusing on saving for the future to understanding how you want to live in the present.
The best approach I’ve found for figuring out how I want to live is Tim Ferriss’ idea of “mini‑retirements,” which he introduced in his book, The Four‑Hour Workweek. He got the idea after realizing that he disliked typical vacations where you pack as much as possible into one or two weeks. After getting burned out on a short trip, he asked himself the question, “Why not take the usual 20–30‑year retirement and redistribute it throughout life instead of saving it all for the end?”88
With this mindset, he designed his own mini‑retirements, trips of “one to six months” where he would test out living in different ways. He described these as an “anti‑vacation” and “though it can be relaxing, the mini‑retirement is not an escape from your life but a reexamination of it—the creation of a blank slate.”89 While designing these breaks into his life he asked himself three questions:
How do your decisions change if retirement isn’t an option?
What if you could use a mini‑retirement to sample your future plans now?
Is it really necessary to commit fully to work to live like a millionaire?
The power of these questions is that they force you to be creative and experimental. For me, I’ve found that this makes life more fun. As I’ve lived in different places around the world and focused on different kinds of work, I’ve created mini‑experiments that help me learn more about how I want to live my life.
I try to think about time in blocks of one to three months and within each block, I pick one or two things I want to prioritize and test. It might be living in a different type of place, working on new projects, traveling, or learning something new. My goal is to test my beliefs to get a better understanding of what really makes my life better. Many people say things to me like “I could never live like you do!” All I can think, however, is “have you tested that?”
The spirit of the mini‑retirement is not about escaping work. It is about testing different circumstances to see if you want to double down on them or change directions. When I started writing this book, I was studying Chinese thirty hours per week and running my online business. It was intense. It’s not something I want to do year‑round, but these intense periods of learning, creativity, and work followed by periods of rest provide a sustainable and energizing way to stay on this path over the long term. This kind of variability is hard to design into your life on the default path. On the pathless path not only is it possible, but it can be one of the most rewarding benefits.
This kind of experimenting can be time-consuming, but for me, it’s worth it. On my previous path, I was more than on my way to a magical retirement number but was also making great progress in undermining the spontaneity, creativity, and energy that would enable me to enjoy life once I got there. For me, testing out different ways of structuring my life now is a win‑win proposition. I’m lowering the odds that I’ll be unhappy in the future all while crafting a life I’m more and more excited to keep living.
These experiences have given me an alternative to the traditional retirement story. While I’m still saving for retirement, I’m not putting all my faith in reaching certain financial milestones as the most important thing. I’m much more focused on spending time and money now to experiment with different modes of living such that when I reach the latter stages of my life, I won’t be making a dramatic shift in life priorities, but continuing on the pathless path.
Have Fun on the Journey
Even though the pathless path does not lead to a specific destination, there may be what Venkatesh Rao, a writer, and consultant, calls “fixed points.” A fixed point is a non‑negotiable goal that you plan to achieve, no matter what.  These fixed points are often a product of our unique cultural scripts.  For example, in the United States, as Rao says, the “American Dream” story is based on “the standard fixed point of homeownership. As in, ‘no matter what happens in the future, I’ll be a homeowner.”90
We all have fixed points that we aim towards in our lives. Homeownership is one of the most popular, but others include paying for children’s college expenses, becoming an executive or partner, founding a company, or reaching a certain net worth.
The problem with these default fixed points is that they are culturally derived rather than a product of our unique motivations and desires. Over time, this means they can become detached from what is possible or reasonable.  For example, in Taipei, people in the previous generation were able to purchase property with only a couple of years of savings from an average job. Now Taipei is home to one of the highest price‑to‑rent ratios in the world, and this same goal can take more than twenty years and for many, it is simply impossible.  While the economic situation has changed radically, many young people orient their lives towards this same goal.
Rao argues that the answer is not to abandon goals altogether but to take them more seriously and to put more thought into identifying unique fixed points, ones that align with the things that bring us alive.
In his book, On Liberty, published in 1859, John Stuart Mill was giving similar advice, arguing that societies need people to embrace their individuality and perform “experiments in living.” He argued that such experiments are vital to the pursuit of knowledge and that cultures only learn and evolve when original approaches to living are discovered. Mill wanted people to act on their inspiration because “the worth of different modes of life should be proved practically when anyone thinks fit to try them.”91 By choosing a unique and personal fixed point, in Mill’s view, you are not only raising the odds of finding a path worth staying on, but you are also serving an important role in pushing culture forward.
Mill argued that conventional ways of living tend to “degenerate into the mechanical’’ and that if societal norms are too strong or rigid, original thinkers who would otherwise experiment will be stifled. He argues that trying to constrain these people is also not worth doing because they already struggle, “fitting themselves, without hurtful compression, into any of the small number of molds which society provides.”92
Technology and increased prosperity make this the best time in our history for our own “experiments in living.” Yet Mill, who was frustrated in his time with how many people seemed “satisfied with the ways of mankind as they now are,” might be surprised at how much shame is still associated with taking a different path.
Embracing a unique fixed point can be an on‑ramp to the pathless path. For example, when I was still at my last full‑time job, I stopped setting an alarm clock in order to prioritize my health and sleep. I designed my life around that fixed point and did my best to lower the odds that it would lead to challenges at work. Right now, I’m orienting my work around taking every seventh week off from work no matter what. This was inspired by tech entrepreneur Sean McCabe, who adopted the policy for himself and eventually, his entire company.93
The fixed points along the default path are not inherently bad, but they do tend to push people towards doing what others do. This can be a good starting point, but if you lean into your own unique psychology, interests, and sense of humor, your journey will be a little more fun and much more meaningful.
In addition, once you are on the pathless path, defining your own constraints and fixed points is not a choice, it’s essential to thriving on your journey.
Reimagine Money
The secret to doing good research is always to be a little underemployed. You waste years by not being able to waste hours. — Amos Tversky
When everyone you know builds their lives around a steady paycheck, it is easy to lose track of what we give up for that paycheck and forget that for most of history this was not a normal state of affairs.
When young people excitedly signed up to work for large organizations after World War II, their parents were stunned. They couldn’t understand why their children would enthusiastically choose lives characterized by what they saw as containing far too much conformity. William Whyte, wrote about this shift in his book The Organization Man, published in 1956. He shared a snippet of writing from a young man typical of the era: “What distinguishes the comfortable young men of today from the uncomfortable young men of the last hundred years…is that for once the younger generation is not in revolt against anything…We don’t want to rebel against our elders.94
The organizations that these young people joined offered predictable incomes and, most of all, predictable lives. Whyte saw this as a dramatic shift from the past because these organizations offered something that previous generations did not have, a safe haven from the real world, noting that “come graduation, they do not go outside to a hostile world; they transfer.”95
Because I belong to the third generation of this tradition, I didn’t have people around me to tell me how life without a paycheck would feel. When I left my job, I expected that working on my own would be challenging, but I did not expect my entire relationship to money and its role in my life to change.
When I quit, my mindset shifted immediately and I looked at every monetary transaction with the intensity of a financial auditor. I used Mint.com to audit my spending and was shocked that I had been spending nearly $6,000 per month living in New York City. While this was less than I earned, it felt high. After factoring in taxes, I was spending close to $100,000 per year for a life I considered “frugal.” This realization embarrassed me, but this story of frugality was easy to believe in a city where there are always people that spend more.
No underlying logic justified my spending and a lot of it could be classified under what writer Thomas J. Bevan calls a “misery tax.” This is the spending an unhappy worker allocates to things that “keep you going and keep you functioning in the job.”96 For me, it was a mixture of alcohol, expensive food, and vacations, and as the amount inched up during my career, I started to believe that my spending was the reason I was working.
When I quit, this kind of spending stopped immediately, and I was surprised at how little I missed it. I’ve since found guidance to reframe how I think about money from Ramit Sethi, an entrepreneur who helps people with personal finances. He asks a great question: “What is your rich life?” The purpose of this question is to stop you from looking at money as an accountant and looking at it as something that might help you live your ideal life. Over time, I’ve found a clear answer: having ownership of my time enriches my life.
Knowing this inspired me to look for other ways to cut my spending since it would extend the time I could spend on my path without running out of money. When I landed my first real freelance project in Boston, this was what inspired me to sublet my New York apartment, find a cheaper one in Boston, and move there almost immediately. When I added up rent savings, cheaper Chipotle bowls, and the lower tax rate, I was able to lower my spending by about $3,000 per month.
With money coming in and a lower cost of living, my financial insecurity decreased, leading to a chain reaction in my understanding of work. If I wasn’t working for money, why was I working? When we work full‑time, employers are paying for our dedication and commitment to the job as a central part of our life. When I became self‑employed, I was disoriented because the people paying me for the projects didn’t care when and how much I worked. They just wanted their problems solved. It was up to me to figure out how to spend my time.
Working on my own, I had infinite degrees of freedom to shape what I worked on, who I worked with, and how much I worked. When people on the pathless path first discover this possibility, it can be jarring. Opting out of work and opting in to other aspects of your life can create questions about who you used to be. It feels weird at first, but over time, you start to change what you value. As I unlocked more time for creative projects, travel with my family, time with my grandmother, and time for learning, I was finally doing the things I claimed to care about.
No amount of money can buy the peace of mind that comes with finding a path that you want to stay on. Once we know, as Vicky Robin argues in her book Your Money or Your Life, that “money is something we choose to trade our life energy for,” it is nearly impossible to give up your time for money without thinking deeply about the trade-offs.97
Have a Little Faith
Belief clings, but faith lets go. – Alan Watts
I was lying on Angie’s bed in Taipei, listening to the music playing at the mall just outside her window. She knew that I planned to leave Taiwan and head to Vietnam. In the two months since we had met, however, it had become clear that I wanted to commit to this relationship. Angie had decided to embark on her own pathless path by leaving her corporate job and joining a local gym as a fitness trainer. Before starting, she planned to travel to Thailand for a month. She thought I was going to leave Taiwan and continue exploring the world, which is why I’m still impressed that she asked me so directly, “so…what are your plans for December?”
We had been inseparable. Wandering around Taipei, going to night markets, reading in the park, and having deep conversations about life. It was beautiful. Whenever you are beginning a new relationship, it’s easy to fast‑forward to the future. Yet I tried to hold back. For most of my life, I had followed a script about how life should be, always trying to choreograph my future. Now I was embracing the pathless path and it was freeing.
On our second date, we rode bikes along the river in Taipei, making our way slowly down the path. We talked about our families, our desires, our fears, and our aspirations. I had felt so alone in the previous year, not able to fully share what I was feeling, and now I was talking to someone who was not only willing to listen but who also seemed to speak the same language.
So I didn’t need to hesitate when I answered her question: “I am coming with you to Thailand.”
I was guided by faith.
Having faith is admitting that you don’t have all the answers for what comes next. Another phrase I’ve found useful to describe this state of mind is what the spiritual teacher Tara Brach calls “radical acceptance,” which she says “is the willingness to experience ourselves and our lives as it is.”
Faith is an essential part of the pathless path and many people mention it when talking about embarking on an uncertain path. This was the case for Michael McBride, who decided to leave his job after some of his history‑related videos went viral on TikTok. He put it simply, “when I left my job, I took a leap of faith.”98
Many people I talk to are convinced that the formula for living on their own terms is saving up enough money. I wish they knew what I know: the longer we spend on a path that isn’t ours, the longer it takes to move towards a path that is. Money might help pay for therapy, time off, and healing retreats, but it won’t help you come to a place where you really trust and know that everything will be okay.
Having faith does not mean being worry‑free. I still worry about money, success, belonging, and whether I can keep this journey going. However, I’m able to recognize that the right response is not to restructure my life to make these worries disappear. It’s to develop a capacity to sit with those anxieties, focus on what I can control, and to open myself up to the world. As the spiritual teacher Sharon Salzberg has written, “whatever takes us to our edge, to our outer limits, leads us to the heart of life’s mystery, and there we find faith.”99 This is the essence of the pathless path, and the only way to develop room for faith in your life is to do exactly as Salzberg says, explore the limits and step into the possibilities for our life. The fact that the next steps are unknown to us is exactly the point.
This is how I knew that the only answer to Angie’s question was that I was coming with her to Thailand. On that trip, we made a deeper commitment to each other, and I decided to return to Taiwan indefinitely to support her as she embarked on the next chapter of her journey. I had gone months without a stable income at this point and I didn’t know if I would be able to figure out how to make money living abroad. But that didn’t seem important at the time. I had faith. I didn’t know what was going to happen next, but I had a hunch it was going to be okay.

8
Redefine Success
People have the notion of saving the world by shifting things around, changing the rules, and who’s on top, and so forth. No, no! Any world is a valid world if it’s alive. The thing to do is to bring life to it, and the only way to do that is to find in your own case where the life is and become alive yourself. – Joseph Campbell
The Second Chapter of Success
In 2019, Gallup surveyed Americans about success. In response to the question, “How do you personally define success?”, 97% agreed with the following statement: A person is successful if they have followed their own interests and talents to become the best they can be at what they care about most. In response to the question, “How do you think others define success?”, only 8% gave the same answer. Instead, 92% felt that other people defined success as follows: A person is successful if they are rich, have a high-profile career, or are well‑known.100
Why the disconnect between how people define success and how we think others define it? Just as when we talk about taking leaps and picking life paths, we simplify the messiness of human nature down to simple stories. When we talk about our goals, we disguise our intentions, especially if we think they demonstrate greed, envy, or pride. We tell only the stories that we think will be seen as acceptable. Everyone knows that we do this, but the result is costly. No one has a clue about others’ motivations and we all end up like contestants on The Bachelor, convincing ourselves that everyone is striving for success for “the wrong reasons.”
Young people pay the highest costs here because they have not yet fully experienced the ups and downs of their own paths and don’t have a good understanding of how others are making decisions years ahead of them. They default to “the heuristic of respecting the people who other people respect,” as doctor and writer Scott Alexander has noted. In today’s world, he says, the most attention and respect goes to people with money, fame, degrees, and power.101
In college, I dreamed of working in consulting and getting an MBA from a top‑ranked school. I remember looking at the salary reports of graduates from these programs and knowing with every bone in my body that a six‑figure salary was what I wanted. At the age of 27, I had miraculously achieved this goal and because I felt so grateful, I hid the fact that I was feeling increasingly lost. The more people I’ve talked to over the years, the more I’ve realized that my case is closer to the norm and the people that are on the path they are meant to be on are more the exception than the rule.
Many people realize they are on the wrong path after achieving impressive milestones. This is what happened to Kevin Durant, a professional basketball player. In 2015, he left his team after nine years to join the best team in the league. In the NBA, players like Durant are judged in part based on whether their team wins a championship. His former team had not. Some players are mocked mercilessly, even after they retire, for failing to achieve this goal. As a result, young players like Durant change teams much more than in the past, doing everything in their power to increase their odds of winning.
The flaw, as Agnes Callard might tell us, is that Durant already knew what he valued and thus, no larger transformation was at stake.  It won’t surprise us then to find that twelve months later when his team won the championship he was not satisfied. His friend Steve Nash reflected on Durant’s confusing emotions that summer: “He didn’t have a great summer…He was searching for what it all meant. He thought a championship would change everything and found out it doesn’t. He was not fulfilled.”102
Many people face such a feeling when they finally land a job, a promotion, or even find themselves at a certain phase of life they always desired.  As author Ryan Holiday wrote, “You know deep down that accomplishing things won’t make you happy, but I think I always fantasized that it would at least feel really good. I was so wrong. Hitting #1 for the first time as an author felt like…nothing. Being a ‘millionaire’…nothing. It’s a trick of evolution that drives us, and no one is immune from making this mistake.”103 This is what Harvard professor Dr. Ben‑Shahar calls the arrival fallacy, the idea that when we reach a certain milestone we will reach a state of lasting happiness.104
When we realize that this isn’t the case, we find ourselves feeling empty, and the easiest way to deal with this is to ignore the feeling and ratchet up the goal. More money, a bigger house, a new car, a higher salary, an executive position at a company, or a larger retirement nest egg. I once asked a partner at my consulting firm about his dream job. He told me he wanted his boss’s position. “At the same company?” I asked. “Then what?” He shrugged and moved on to something else. Something tells me that when the partner achieves his goal, he’s not going to feel satisfied.
Eleanor Roosevelt once argued that “when you adopt the standards and the values of someone else or a community… you surrender your own integrity. You become, to the extent of your surrender, less of a human being.”105 I learned this slowly, jumping from job to job doing the same thing that Durant was doing, trying to achieve someone else’s goals. For years I believed that once I had achieved an imaginary future leadership position, I would then finally be able to be myself. This is an obvious delusion, but one many people tell themselves.
It was incredibly painful for me to realize that if I truly cared about living in a different way, I might need to leave the business world. The journey towards the pathless path often starts at this moment, with a willingness to investigate your disappointment and to wonder if there is a better way of defining success.
The better way is what I call the “second chapter of success” in which you shift your mindset from what you lack to what you have to offer, from ambition to aspiration, and from hoping that joy will result from a specific outcome to experiencing it as a byproduct of your journey.
People are reluctant to flip the page to the second chapter of success because it requires rejecting paths that are not only more accepted but also promise money, respect, and admiration. However, if we are to believe the results of the Gallup survey, where 97% of people said that their personal definition of success included being “the best they can be at what they care about most,” most people desire a path that aligns with what matters uniquely to them. The biggest hurdle then is learning as early as possible the lesson that Kevin Durant learned when he reached the heights of success, and that as Henry David Thoreau once reflected, “the life which men praise and regard as successful is but one kind.”106
The pathless path is a define-your-own-success adventure. In the first couple years, it felt silly to tell people how I defined success: feeling alive, helping people, and meeting my needs. Over time, I realized that the real benefit of this orientation towards success was that I wasn’t competing with anyone. This meant that the odds of success were incredibly high and the benefits of staying on the pathless path would only compound and increase over time.
Prestige and “Bad Tests”
My first week at McKinsey did not feel like work. Instead, it felt like I had gained access to the most interesting club in the world. I thought, “How did I pull this off?” Although most people in my life had no idea what McKinsey was, the friends who did were impressed. Economist Adam Smith once wrote that people desire “not only to be loved, but to be lovely.”107 As soon as I landed the job at McKinsey, I felt lovely, drunk on prestige.
Author Kevin Simler defines prestige as “the kind of status we get from doing impressive things or having impressive traits or skills.”108 In some domains, like sports, this works well. Those we pay the most attention to, like Tom Brady or Lebron James, are also the most skilled. In the business world, however, talent is harder to assess and we tend to use proxies like credentials to determine quality and prestige.
This can be a good way for a company to make talent decisions at scale, but it also motivates many people to seek credentials rather than finding work they enjoy. In my first few weeks at McKinsey, a recruiter from Google connected with me to explain a special program that hired consultants from McKinsey after they had spent two years at the company. If I decided to apply, I’d have a good chance of getting hired. This felt weird. Only a few months earlier, I was desperate to work at either of these companies and now, only a few weeks after adding the McKinsey logo to my LinkedIn profile, I was being granted special status in a “prestige economy” that, as the writer Sarah Kendzior argues, places “money over merit, brand over skill.”109
This kind of status was not something I shied away from, but deep down I knew that the underlying skill I was being rewarded for was my ability to hack the system. Almost everyone who works in these fields understands that passing these “bad tests” is how things work but no one, including me, at first, imagines there is another option.
Paul Graham, the investor and startup mentor, argues that far too many young people believe learning how to hack bad tests is a necessary part of success. In his work with entrepreneurs, he struggles to convince them that they don’t need to play these games. He shares a common back-and-forth he has with founders about the factors that lead to success:
How does one get lots of users? They had all kinds of ideas about that. They needed to do a big launch that would get them ’exposure.’ They needed influential people to talk about them. They even knew they needed to launch on a Tuesday, because that’s when one gets the most attention. No, I would explain, that is not how to get lots of users. The way you get lots of users is to make the product really great.110
When you’ve spent your entire life studying for the test and compiling long lists of achievements it can be hard to believe that true success is that simple. In the consulting industry, bad tests were prevalent. While the quality of your work was important, other tests like getting senior partners to like me, taking any work given to me, dressing the right way, and learning to speak in a certain way were much more important in getting promoted, getting a raise, and continuing on an impressive career trajectory.
I don’t think I realized how much I hated this until I became self‑employed and immediately stopped spending any time hacking tests. With freelancing, I was competing on the quality of my ideas and my ability to do good work for clients. A lot of former consultants who become freelancers are surprised at how much less time it takes to do the same work. This is not because it’s any easier. In fact, it’s a lot harder without the support of an entire firm’s resources. It’s just that there are no longer hundreds of different people you need to impress.
Working on my own, I’m no longer in Kendzior’s prestige economy where brand is more important than skill. I’m in an indie economy, where over the long‑term I’m competing on learning, developing skills, and my reputation. This is a lot harder but also a lot more rewarding. Despite this, it’s interesting to see how people map their own understanding of how they think the world works onto my current path. Many people say things like,  “you can do this because you worked at McKinsey and went to MIT.”  They assume that my credentials are what matter most. I wish this were the case! While having impressive credentials can open doors, it hasn’t translated into a high income, especially with some of the more creative things I’ve done like writing or online courses.
It took a long time for me to realize that I was not stuck hacking bad tests for the rest of my life. While I was at MIT, I read William Deresiewicz’s essay, “The Disadvantages of An Elite Education.’’ His argument that elite schools often incentivize behaviors that undermine living a meaningful life excited me, but I had no idea what to do about it. People are very aware of the absurdity of much of what you have to do to succeed in different companies and institutions, but still often gaslight themselves by starting off their own complaints with, “I know I should be grateful, but…”.
With more possibilities to work independently and become an entrepreneur, I’m here to tell you to take your own doubts seriously and demand better! It is no longer true that to succeed, you need to hack bad tests. I agree with Graham when he says, “It used to be true. In the mid-20th century, when the economy was composed of oligopolies, the only way to the top was by playing their game.”111
The world is changing and the pathless path is just one way to exit the world of bad tests. As more and more people decide that these tests are silly, we can create new and better games. Ones that aren’t optimized for how employers like to see the world, but rather align with how we are motivated to learn and grow through our lives. I think this really matters and I agree with Graham’s assessment: “This is not just a lesson for individuals to unlearn, but one for society to unlearn, and we’ll be amazed at the energy that’s liberated when we do.”112
Find Your Tribe
The internet has made my new life and career on the pathless path possible. In my last full‑time job, I started writing short articles about my thoughts on the future of work. I was writing on my own and not with the permission of my company. This was scary because at my company, only senior executives were encouraged to share their thoughts on social media.
My fears subsided as I started to make friends through writing. After posting one article, I received a message from someone who was a Chief Talent Officer at a company in New York City. He was enthusiastic about my curiosity and proposed we meet up for coffee. We had a lively discussion, the kind that leaves you with more energy than when you arrived. I wanted more of that, which motivated me to keep writing. This also exposed me to a new kind of prestige that I wasn’t allergic to – recognition from other people who are passionate about ideas.
Increasingly, the internet is supporting the emergence of many micro‑communities that provide people with attention and prestige in unique ways. For example, I participate in an evolving “creator economy” ecosystem that has developed on Twitter, in private groups and online courses, and through real‑life meetups. One way to earn prestige in this world is to give generously and share everything you know. People like Nat Eliason, Anne-Laure Le Cunff, Pieter Levels, and Tiago Forte have earned status not only because of their extrinsic success but also their willingness to support others and share in extensive detail how they make money and how they think about their lives.
The concept of prestige is shifting quickly. As our connections to local communities have broken down, we are paying more attention than ever to people who are successful in the traditional sense, through money, status, or fame. But below this flashy surface, many people are seeking out smaller and quieter communities where they can earn prestige in a way that suits their lives.
These communities, many of which have emerged online, have been a welcome companion to me on the pathless path. I’ve been surprised at how many people across the globe resonate with my story and are searching for a different game to play than hacking the “bad tests” that Paul Graham writes about. Now it’s easier than ever to open your computer and opt-in to a community that defines prestige, status, and success in a way that matches how you want to design your life.
The internet does enable negative groups to form, but we pay far too much attention to these communities and not enough to the positive connections and life options made possible all over the world for people who are online. If the default path is the story of the industrial world, then the pathless path is the natural story for a digital‑native world in which nothing can stop us from finding others who share our desires, ideas, and questions.
When I took a break from freelancing in the first year of my self‑employment journey, I decided to spend more time writing online, launching my podcast, and building an online course. In 2018, this was not an obvious path to success.  I worked on those things for more than eighteen months before I made more than $1,000. Why would I keep working on these things? Because I had found a small group of people that saw value in what I was doing and encouraged me to keep going.
It’s hard to overstate how powerful this force has been in my life. Seth Godin argues that humans are wired “to become a member in good standing of the tribe” and on the default path this means we will tend to conform.113 On the pathless path, powered by digital communities, we can surround ourselves with people that inspire us and push us to improve in the ways we care about. The longer I’ve stayed on this path and the more effort I’ve put into connecting with people heading in similar directions, the better my life has become.
This is why I’m fond of the advice angel investor Naval Ravikant offers, “play long‑term games with long‑term people.” Ever since making that first friend from my writing, I haven’t stopped writing publicly for more than five years, mostly driven by the fact that I continue to meet great people.  One example is my friend Saloni Miglani in India, who quit her job and became a remote worker. In a note she sent to me, she told me that “your writing showed me how I could be a happier, calmer, and more creative human being.” Little does she know that I learn just as much from her, and others like her every week.
Early on, it was clear that if I continued to share over a long enough period of time, it might radically improve my life. As I’m writing this book, I can say without a doubt that my hunch was correct.
You Are a Bad Egg
In his book Seeing Like a State, James Scott argues that “legibility” made modernity possible. By legibility, he means “arranging the population in ways that simplified the classic state functions of taxation, conscription, and prevention of rebellion.”114
One example of this standardization is Germany’s invention of “scientific forestry.” By using the output of paper as a measurement for a specific volume of trees, forests could be quantified and trees could be planted to optimize output. This method worked well in the short term, but within a couple of generations, it resulted in costs such as the loss of important local species and soil degradation. It turns out that Mother Nature’s approach was wiser than the scientists understood.
This kind of quantification has now been applied to many parts of society. In terms of work, the fundamental organizing unit of the economy is the “job.” This is why so much attention is paid to unemployment rates, also called the “jobs numbers.” The former academic turned writer and financial advisor Ben Hunt has argued that for most of the 20th century, such standardization was “industrially necessary” and vital to the success of the modern economy, state, and world.115
However, he continues, over the last 50 years the need for people to be “legible” and fit into a standard model of work has merely become “industrially preferable.” This puts government and institutional leaders in a position where they are incentivized to convince people that following rigid paths in their institutions is the correct path for everyone. Hunt uses the example of the “industrially necessary egg,” to make his point. “Good” eggs are those that meet specifications, are perfectly clean, and can legally be sold in a supermarket.
Any farmer knows, however, there are other good eggs, such as the ones from Hunt’s farm, which are often dirty, come in various shapes, and don’t need to be refrigerated. Many people see these as bad eggs, but Hunt knows the truth, that they are “one of the best things in life.”116
Hunt’s eggs provide a good metaphor for thinking about the pathless path. On the default path, you are automatically a “good egg.” On the pathless path, people default to seeing you as a “bad egg.” Even if it was never spoken, when I left the default path I felt as if I had immediately crossed an imaginary boundary where I was some sort of rebel that needed to defend my recklessness.
The belief that full‑time work is normal, however, doesn’t match with reality. In 2013, Gallup found that the global payroll to population rate, or the percentage of people working full-time, to be 26%.117 If only a quarter of the population has “good egg” jobs, maybe the prevailing story that tells us how we should think about work and the economy is not the best one. At a minimum, we should be a little more suspicious of anyone who seems to think there is one true way of working.
Yet this is the world we live in. This means embracing the pathless path requires grappling with the feeling of being a “bad egg.” This often drives people who leave the default path to eagerly embrace new identities that are still recognizable as legible to the “traditional” economy. They gravitate to titles like a startup founder, entrepreneur, freelance consultant, or even the newly emerging “creator.”
For example, when Khe Hy first left his job on Wall Street, he shared that his initial plan was, “to become a venture-backed entrepreneur.” He wanted to start a company and raise capital from investors. As he reflected later, “it sounds so lame, but to me a big portion of success was other people thinking I was successful.”118
Embracing a new identity can be a useful way to enter the uncertain world of the pathless path. At a minimum, it gives you an answer when people inevitably start asking about your plans. However, many people quickly realize that they’ve created the same conditions that they sought to escape. Luckily, Khe figured this out, and before he got started, he said that he “had just enough separation” from his old life that he knew he wanted something much different than founding a company, at least in the first couple years of his journey.
The pathless path is about ignoring the pull of needing to be a “good egg” and learning what truly enables you to thrive. What this really means is developing an appreciation for discomfort. Howard Gray, a consultant and storyteller, and veteran of the pathless path, sees the uncertainty of his path as a positive thing. When his life “stops moving and it calcifies or solidifies, that’s a bad thing” and he’s on the right track when it’s a “formless, evolving thing.”119
The comfort we feel when we do what is expected keeps us from developing the skills we need to face uncertainty. Noah Lowry, a pitcher for the San Francisco Giants, dedicated his childhood and early adulthood to baseball. But injuries forced him to retire when he was just 26, early for a professional athlete. This experience rocked Lowry’s world; he described it as “disorienting and chaotic.” Later he recounted, “In a moment, my identity crumbled, who I thought I was, the man my wife thought she had married, fell apart.”120 Lowry had reached the heights of success in his field, but when that was taken away, he realized he did not have the skills needed to embark on a new path.
Chauncey Billups came to the same realization after retiring from professional basketball at the age of 37. Even though his career wasn’t shortened by injury as Lowry’s was, he was still rattled: “You go from being a very old dude at 37…to being a young dude with no real experience anywhere else. You can become lost.”121
This reminds me of Rebecca Solnit’s insight about getting lost in A Field Guide To Getting Lost. She says that, “losing things is about the familiar falling away,” but “getting lost is about the unfamiliar appearing.”122 Billups was losing his career at the same time he was becoming lost, heading in a new direction. If a professional athlete like him was not prepared, even after earning more than $100 million in his career, this tells us that learning how to deal with uncertainty is not a natural thing, or at minimum is something that can’t be “solved” with more money.
Part of the promise of being a “good egg” is that we will not feel lost. But the “bad eggs’’ on the pathless path eventually realize there is wisdom in being lost. This doesn’t mean it will be easy. Like Billups, you will sense that you are doing something wrong, or at minimum, don’t know what you are doing. Simple questions from others like “what do you do?” will expose your own uncertainty and can feel like a death blow to the soul.
We can weaken the impact of these kinds of questions by knowing that there is no way to avoid being seen as a “bad egg.” The only way forward is to eventually get to a point when you realize that, in fact, there are no good eggs or bad eggs at all. The pathless path is about releasing yourself from this way of seeing the world and realizing that the number of career paths worth following is infinite.
As Thoreau once wrote at Walden Pond, “Not till we are lost, in other words, not till we have lost the world, do we begin to find ourselves, and realize where we are and the infinite extent of our relations.”123
Find Your “Enough”
Are you helping people? Are they happy? Are you happy? Are you profitable? Isn’t that enough? – Derek Sivers
Paul Jarvis, a designer and entrepreneur, wrote Company of One, which details his efforts to build a sustainable business and life. At many stages along his journey, people urged him to grow his business, hire employees, and earn more money. But at every opportunity, he chose to keep working alone. Over time he built a path that he was excited to stay on and realized that “a large part of choosing your path is figuring out which values will determine your worth.” Once he had a good understanding of those values, it was easier for him to decide where to focus.124
Coming to this understanding requires a lot of reflection and experimentation, but surprisingly, this is often much easier on the pathless path than the default path. Because I work for myself, I spend zero minutes a year blaming other people for my circumstances. It forces me to take complete ownership of my life and continue to experiment, reflect, and try again. In six months I can experiment with my life in many more ways than I did in the ten years I spent on the default path, allowing me to learn much more quickly.
Over time, you start to understand what matters, and more importantly, when to say “no.” To engage with these issues, Jarvis wrote a personal definition of “enough.” Notice how detailed it is:
Enough is the antithesis of unchecked growth because growth encourages mindless consumption and enough requires constant questioning and awareness. Enough is when we reach the upper bound of what’s required. Enough revenue means our business is profitable and can support however many employees/freelancers we have, even if it’s just one person. Enough income means we can live our lives with a bit of financial ease, and put something away for later. Enough means our families are fed, have roofs over their heads and their futures are considered. Enough stuff means we have what we need to live our lives without excess.125
Jarvis knows and can articulate what matters to him and he is not afraid to share it. For many in full‑time jobs, this kind of reflection can be hard, if not impossible. For example, very few people would ever consider walking into their manager’s office in September and declaring, “I’ve made enough money for this year. See you in January!” Instead, it is easier to accept the economic logic of profit‑seeking organizations, that “more is better,” and apply it to our own lives.
This approach can work for some, but it drives many towards burnout. Writer Jocelyn Glei, who worked at a startup, noted, “After being at a startup for four years and getting the chance to make tons of cool stuff, I was intoxicated with my own productivity. I got wildly ambitious and decided to 3x my workload, adding multiple massive new projects (of my own devising!) to an already intensive work schedule.” It was hard for her to see what was happening because she liked the work so much. However, “by the end of that year, I had produced a ton of incredible things, but I was a burnt‑out husk of a person.” She calls this her “busyness breakdown.” After work she had no energy left to invest in relationships, health, and other things that mattered to her. She realized that when “the way we work today and the way we work tomorrow becomes the status quo,” it quickly becomes “the new normal,” and that crafting a new approach to living your life becomes really hard. She was incredibly productive, but for her, it was not enough.126
As I developed a better relationship with money and stopped acting from a mindset of scarcity and fear, I started to work out my own perspective on “enough”:
Enough is knowing that no amount in my bank account will ever satisfy my deepest fears. It’s knowing that I have enough friends that would gladly open their door and share a meal if I was ever in need. It’s the feeling that I’ve been able to spend my time over an extended stretch of time working on projects that are meaningful to me, helping people with a spirit of generosity, and having enough space and time in my life to stay energized to keep doing this over the long‑term. Enough is seeing a clear opportunity that will increase my earnings in the short‑term, but knowing that saying “no” will open me up to things that might be even more valuable in ways that are hard to understand. Enough is knowing that the clothes, fancy meal, or latest gadget will not make me happier, but also that buying such things won’t mean I’m going to end up broke. Enough is having meaningful conversations with people that inspire me, people that I love, or people that support me.
On the pathless path, knowing you have enough is what gives you the freedom to say “no” to clear financial opportunities and say “yes” to something that might bring you alive and might even pay off much more over the long term.
When I launched a podcast, people assumed it was a massive project and that I wanted to compete with Gimlet and NPR. They didn’t know that I considered it an experiment and wasn’t aiming toward monetary success or fame. From this perspective, it made sense to create a podcast cover in 20 minutes in PowerPoint, spend less than an hour editing the audio, and publish without much of a following. There was nothing else to gain because I was operating from the feeling of enough.
If we don’t define “enough,” we default to more, which makes it impossible to understand when to say no.
When I wrote this section, I emailed Jarvis and asked him to expand on his “Enough” essay, but I got an automated response, “Please note, this email address is no longer active or monitored.”
It seems Jarvis knows when enough is enough.
Beyond Scarcity Mindset
The problem is that our culture has engaged in a Faustian bargain, in which we trade our genius and artistry for apparent stability. – Seth Godin
My mother credits the health crisis I faced in my 20s for putting me on my current path. “It changed you,” she says.
While I don’t think it was the sole reason I left the default path, my illness did change my relationship to uncertainty. While I was sick, I went several months without a paycheck, spent thousands on healthcare, and watched my savings dwindle down to less than three months of living expenses. Three years later, I had saved up five times the amount I had in savings. So the prospect of leaving without an income didn’t seem so scary.
Without my health crisis, I probably wouldn’t have been so comfortable leaving my job without any clear plan for making money. This seems crazy now, but it didn’t occur to me to radically cut my spending until after I left my job. A trained consultant and former financial analyst who had spent hundreds of hours building models for companies and I had never bothered to create a detailed model of my own spending. What was I thinking?
This is not how most people approach quitting their job. What I’ve discovered in conversations is that no matter how much money people have, they will go to enormous lengths to avoid any discomfort related to their financial situation.  This is what makes quitting full‑time employment seem terrifying and a steady paycheck so addictive.
Economist Daniel Kahneman found that “the importance that people attached to income at age 18 also anticipated their satisfaction with their income as adults.”127 While on the default path, I was always surrounded by people that cared more about money and it was easy to convince myself that I placed very little importance on money. When I quit my job, I realized my assessment was wrong.
Though I had gone several months without a paycheck while sick, the months after leaving my job were a completely different experience. Money went from a background consideration to one of the most important things in my life. I was experiencing what psychologists call, “scarcity mindset.”
Some of the first research into this state of mind was done in 1944. Worries about food shortages due to the war led to research about how people react to going without food.128 Researchers at the University of Minnesota recruited 36 participants for a study that involved long stretches without eating. In addition to the expected biological reactions, the men became obsessed with food. They talked about opening restaurants and switching careers to work in food service, shared recipes, and compared food prices across various newspapers. The researchers concluded that when we feel we lack something, we tend to obsess over it.
When I first left my job I was similarly “starved” of my paycheck. This inspired my cost‑cutting move to Boston and drove me to go all‑in on finding freelance projects. This calmed the feelings of scarcity for a while but distracted me from getting to the root of my insecurities.
When I moved to Taiwan, I intended to seek out freelancing work but was pulled in by both the magic of non‑doing and the excitement of a new relationship. Without money coming in, I shifted my attention to cutting expenses even further. With the assistance of a spending tracking app, I scrutinized every purchase like a seasoned accountant and was able to lower my cost of living to less than $1,000 per month. Again, this lessened the pressure to make money but it kicked a deeper reckoning with my feelings down the road.
When I started to make plans with Angie to stay in Asia, I started to worry about making money again. This led me to accept a freelance project with a small consulting firm. It paid $7,500, which would fund my life for several months, but when I started working on the project, I realized I had talked myself into the project in order to calm my fears rather than as something I was excited to work on. I committed to not making the same mistake again.
American anthropologist Ernest Becker was convinced that most of our actions in life are driven by a fear of death. Behind my money fears was a longing to feel that my life mattered. I suspect this is the same for many, and money is one shortcut we use to “prove” our worth. Yet in my experience, no amount of money ever seems to satisfy. Becker argues that the only way to transcend these existential fears is to live a life that feels heroic. He argues that “if everyone honestly admitted his urge to be a hero it would be a devastating release of truth.”129
What he means by heroic is less about saving the world and closer to the pathless path: a journey of finding yourself, grappling with your insecurities, and daring to seek out a life that is uniquely yours. Becker argues that prescribed paths of the modern world can trap people into conforming to the expectations of others instead of taking steps to create their own unique path.
On the pathless path, the pressure of conformity is not a major concern, but that does not mean an ideal life will emerge automatically. You need to take steps to create it, and in those months in Asia, I started to realize that I needed to graduate from my role as accountant. Minimizing spending is a useful step in lowering the pressure of making money, but it’s not a lifestyle. While it gave me the confidence to make drastic changes without sacrificing my happiness, it kept me in a mindset of scarcity instead of leaning into possibility.
Do I still worry about money? Yes. But now I’m hyper‑aware of how my financial insecurities might distract me from efforts that will help me stay energized and motivated on this path. Instead of playing to not lose, I’m playing to win.
Behind our money fears are existential fears, like the fear of death or the fear of not being loved, respected, and admired. These fears are likely not solvable but we can learn to coexist with them. This is also why financial worries can be infinite and people can chase more and more their entire lives. The flip side of this is that if we can learn to coexist with our financial insecurities, we can turn them into a secondary concern. This opens you up to the real secret: the opportunities of the pathless path are infinite too.

9
The Real Work of Your Life
There’s so much more to who you are than you know right now. You are, indeed, something mysterious and someone magnificent. You hold within you – secreted for safekeeping in your heart – a great gift for this world. Although you might sometimes feel like a cog in a huge machine, that you don’t really matter in the great scheme of things, the truth is that you are fully eligible for a meaningful life, a mystical life, a life of the greatest fulfillment and service. – Bill Plotkin
Finding Your Conversation
I’ve been inspired by the poet David Whyte’s way of interpreting the world, which he calls the “conversational nature of reality.” He believes all of us have an ongoing “conversation” with the world. While this may play in literal conversations with others or ourselves, it can also be metaphorical. What I’ve taken it to mean is that we all have things we are meant to find out about ourselves and the only way to discover them is to open ourselves up to the world.
One of the best ways to discover your conversation is to start asking questions driven by your curiosity.  For me, some of my favorite questions include:
What matters?
Why do we work?
What is the “good life”?
What holds people back from change?
How do we find work that brings us alive?
These are not simple, but when I learned to be guided by my curiosity and pay attention, I started noticing that answers would spontaneously emerge as a byproduct of living my life.  It’s also when you know you’ve found a “real conversation” which as Whyte describes, “is one that, no matter how slowly, helps you make sense of the world around you.”130
The conversational nature of reality is most apparent when you are willing to exist at “the frontier” of your current reality. As Whyte reflects, “It’s astonishing how much time human beings spend away from that frontier.” The default path keeps people from this frontier but the pathless path pushes you towards it. To Whyte, the cost of not moving towards the frontier is profound, as we often risk missing out on a “deeper, broader, and wider possible future that’s waiting.”131
I was first forced towards the edge of my reality the first week after quitting my job. I set out to wander around New York and ended up at a park called the Cloisters, at the literal frontier of New York, a city that I had failed to fully explore in the two and a half years that I had been there. I wandered through the park overlooking the Hudson. I felt lost, but not in a way that I could do anything about. If you had asked me where I was headed, I wouldn’t have had an answer. If you suggested I might move to Boston in a few months, I might have believed you. But if you said I’d end up in Asia, married, a little over two years later? I wouldn’t have even known what to do with that information. Being at the frontier of your current reality is disorienting. Deep down you might have a sense that you should keep going in a certain direction, but you never know why.
This is what Whyte means when he writes about the conversational nature of reality. It’s an acknowledgment that there are deeper forces at play in the world and we are a tiny little part of all that magic. It’s about existing within that magic and still daring to ask questions about what matters or where you fit in. Much of my previous life had been scripted into a routine and I spent almost all my time knowing where I was supposed to be. This short‑circuited my curiosity for years and kept me from seeing that there was a “conversation” with the world to be had at all.
When you step off the default path, you will be thrust towards the frontier. Almost immediately, clues about your conversation will emerge from what captures your attention and questions will appear that gives you a better understanding of what you’re really after. This will be a confusing time. You may feel the urge to tell everyone about your new insights, questions, and curiosities, but this can be a mistake. Your ideas may make others uncomfortable and any doubt, skepticism, or criticism they express could convince you to run away from the frontier.
My own conversation has evolved slowly. At first, it was a solo conversation with broad, ambiguous questions ignited by losing my grandfather and losing my identity during my health crisis. This morphed into a more complex conversation over time, one that involved realizations from my life as well as from other people I was meeting through my writing. These connections were vital to staying at the frontier and exploring. In my favorite essay, “Solitude and Leadership,” William Deresiewicz highlights the importance of searching for wisdom in real conversations with close friends:
Introspection means talking to yourself, and one of the best ways of talking to yourself is by talking to another person. One other person you can trust, one other person to whom you can unfold your soul. One other person you feel safe enough with to allow you to acknowledge things—to acknowledge things to yourself—that you otherwise can’t. Doubts you aren’t supposed to have, questions you aren’t supposed to ask. Feelings or opinions that would get you laughed at by the group or reprimanded by the authorities.132
While the pathless path is a solo journey, it is important that you have at least one close friend with whom you can have these kinds of intimate conversations. They will help you remain aware of your own emerging conversation with the world.
I’ve been lucky to find many people willing to have those conversations with me that have helped me be comfortable exploring my own frontier. The benefits of this have been profound. While I don’t have perfect answers yet for the questions I keep asking, my conversation has somehow turned into a full life, one filled with people, ideas, curiosities, and work that will keep me engaged for many years to come.
Design for Liking Work
We are always falling in love or quarreling, looking for jobs or fearing to lose them, getting ill and recovering, following public affairs. If we let ourselves, we shall always be waiting for some distraction or other to end before we can really get down to our work. The only people who achieve much are those who want knowledge so badly that they seek it while the conditions are still unfavorable. Favorable conditions never come. – C.S. Lewis
John O’Nolan set a goal for himself to build a $1 million company by the time he turned 30. After several failed attempts, he decided to reevaluate. He realized that if he stuck to this goal, he might achieve it, but he might build a company he didn’t want to be part of.
He shifted his approach towards building a business that he wanted to be “stuck with” and revisited an idea that he had sidelined: building a new blogging platform. His idea seemed silly. Everyone used dominant platforms like WordPress or Blogger. Who was he to try to compete in that space? Nevertheless, he decided to go for it and founded a new blogging platform named Ghost.
To ensure that he was taking a long-term approach, John made decisions that differed radically from those that are made in a traditional startup. For example, he wouldn’t control the shares and he would not be able to sell the company. In an interview with Ali Abdaal, he said, “I don’t own Ghost. I am a trustee of Ghost, which means I can steer it as an owner would, but if I ever get sick of it, I can’t sell it. I don’t own any shares.”133 This is opposed to how almost everyone in the technology industry operates, but it makes sense if you’re planning on sticking with the company you’re building.
Instead of optimizing for a future “exit,” or a sale of the company, he built a company he wanted to keep working at and all his decisions continue to be based on this goal. As his platform grew, corporations started asking the company to do customized installations for them. John decided he didn’t want to deal with these high‑maintenance customers and turned them down. Despite this obvious opportunity, Ghost still does not employ a single employee that works with enterprise customers. John learned the same lesson I had in taking the client that had drained my energy. No money is worth it if it undermines your desire to stay on the journey.
Many stumble upon the work they enjoy doing by saying “no” to obvious opportunities. John reflected, “As soon as I let go of this notion of huge success, that’s when success started coming to me.” I don’t think this is a random occurrence. Saying no to something requires that we know what we stand for. When I decided to say no to future freelance projects, I knew that it was time to take my writing, my online business aspirations, and my other ideas seriously.
On the pathless path, the goal is not to find a job, make money, build a business, or achieve any other metric. It’s to actively and consciously search for the work that you want to keep doing.
This is one of the most important secrets of the pathless path.
With this approach, it doesn’t make sense to chase any financial opportunity if you can’t be sure that you will like the work. What does make sense is experimenting with different kinds of work, and once you find something worth doing, working backward to build a life around being able to keep doing it.
It’s a shift from the mindset that work sucks towards the idea that you can design a life around liking work. I didn’t realize how profound this shift is until I sat down to write this book.
When I first left my job I was running away and wanted to escape. This desire drove me to design my life around flexibility, which I achieved to a remarkable degree. I went from having to be in an office more than 2,000 hours per year to having to spend less than a couple of days each month in any physical location.
Unfortunately, this life was built around freelancing and my heart was never in it. I still enjoy working on some consulting projects, but it’s not what drives me. The work that I want to keep doing is writing, sharing stories, helping people, and doing other experiments online. When I started my podcast and blog it felt silly to like this kind of work. Now I know that this is the real work that matters.
Finding work you want to keep doing, says author Stephen Cope, is “the great work of your life.” Cope’s biggest fear is that he might “die without having lived fully.”134 This impulse drove his curiosity as he sought out wisdom in books, reading upwards of three hours a day. Eventually, he wrote The Great Work of Your Life to explore the unique qualities of people who search for the things that bring them alive. His exploration was inspired by a passage he read in the Gospel of Thomas:
If you bring forth what is within you, what you bring forth will save you. If you do not bring forth what is within you, what you do not bring forth will destroy you.135
He researched the lives of Susan B. Anthony, Robert Frost, John Keats, Harriet Tubman, and Henry David Thoreau and found that the common trait they shared was seriously attempting to bring forth what was inside of them. This didn’t come easy to any of them and they all faced challenges, rejection, and criticism. Yet at every key point in their lives, they either kept looking for what brought them alive or protected their time so that they could work on what mattered. In the words of Thoreau, the game they played and that we should play is to “be resolutely and faithfully what you are.”136
When I think about the people that “bring forth what is inside of them,” I think about my mother. She got a job at my university while I was in my second year, and she quickly became the go‑to person not only for solving financial aid problems but, for many of my friends, as someone to talk to. She was a mentor and friend to the students that worked for her. In our extended family, she is the planner who makes sure that everyone comes together. In our small town, she lends a hand when people fall ill, raises money for the needy, and plays an active role in improving the school. In every role she steps into, she finds a way to bring give all that she has to offer.
However, she also consistently urges me to take a “comfortable state job,” no matter how happy I am or how much success I’ve found on my new path. She’s usually half-joking but the suggestion fascinates me. Where does the impulse to find a comfortable job, no matter the personal cost, come from? I think it is partly due to our narrow conception of work as only a full‑time job with a salary and benefits. Like Cope, however, I have embraced a broader conception of work and agree with him that the search for work worth doing is the real work and one of the most important pursuits in life.
It’s hard to understate how much the narrow conception of work constrains us and this has become obvious to me observing my wife explore various art projects such as watercolor and acrylic painting, drawing and sketching, rock painting, Zentangle, and others. Her work impresses and inspires me. It is work worth doing and it will crush me if she loses her passion for it. Yet when she shares her work, especially with people in the United States, they always suggest that she monetize: “You should offer painting classes!” “Are you going to sell those?” “You could make a lot of money!” The assumption is that making money or finding a way to turn a passion into a job is one of the most important things. While money is important on the pathless path, using it as a filter for finding the work worth doing, especially at first, is a mistake.
More important is the realization that finding something worth doing indefinitely is more powerful and exciting than any type of security, comfort, stability, or respect a job might offer. Fighting for the opportunity to do this work is what matters, whether or not you make money from it in the short term.
I was slow to realize this, but I know it now. The work I get paid for may shift over time, and it may or may not involve the things that I want to keep doing. But what I want to keep doing, such as mentoring young people, writing, teaching, sharing ideas, connecting people, and having meaningful conversations, is worth fighting for.
I am consciously pursuing a life designed around doing work I like and I’m lucky to have someone to look up to like my mother, whose life has embodied this principle, whether she set out to do this on purpose or not. She can find a role or a place for herself in many environments. I struggled to find my place on my previous path, so now I’m taking a different one. I hope I can convince those of you who are like me that searching for work you like and want to keep doing is worthwhile.
Most of all, I yearn for a world where more people can live like my mother.
We Want To Be Useful
Usefulness, whatever form it may take, is the price we should pay for the air we breathe and the food we eat and the privilege of being alive. And it is its own reward, as well, for it is the beginning of happiness, just as self-pity and withdrawal from the battle are the beginning of misery. – Eleanor Roosevelt
According to Robert Kegan, a psychologist at Harvard, we are shifting away from a world where we need to fit in towards one where we must develop the skill of “self‑authoring.”137 Instead of looking to external cues to learn how to live, we need to have a coherent internal narrative about why we are living a certain way. This is the ethos of the pathless path and if you don’t know or understand your own story, you will struggle.
One of the hardest questions people face when they think of their own story, however, is “what should I do?”
A significant barrier to figuring out what we really want to do is the voice in our head that warns us to stop when we consider or start doing things that are not broadly seen as “normal.”  Professor and author Brene Brown’s clarification of shame and guilt helped me understand what’s really going on when we struggle to pay attention to our intuitions and desires. She defines shame as “the intensely painful feeling or experience of believing that we are flawed and therefore unworthy of love and belonging.” She believes that most people give too much power to this emotion when making life choices.”138
She doesn’t think we can “solve” shame and suggest that people pay attention to a slightly different emotion, guilt. She defines guilt as “holding something we’ve done or failed to do up against our values and feeling psychological discomfort.”139 In contrast to shame, guilt is actionable. The disconnect between what we claim to care about and what we do (or don’t do) points out what matters to us.
Guilt drives many people to work, and this is a normal reaction to this uncomfortable emotion. Most people want to contribute, help, and engage with the world. However, sometimes this impulse gets hacked by our shame and we follow paths that aren’t ours because we feel like the world’s love depends on us doing a certain thing. We are afraid that if we step away or make a change, we might be cast out of our family or community. This is one of life’s most terrifying feelings and keeps many from making changes. Yet if we learn to recognize this reaction, we can quiet the voice of shame and use our guilt in a healthy manner to guide us towards things we claim to care about.
In my travels around the world, meeting a diverse range of people that have left the default path, nothing has been more consistent than the reality that most people want to engage with the world and to be useful. Despite many people thinking that their ideal life would be living out the rest of their life on a beach, when given the option of following that path, few people take it.
Author Sebastian Junger, in his book about soldiers who had returned from war, found a similar thing. Despite dealing with post‑traumatic stress disorder, many of the soldiers wanted to return to dangerous warzones. Why? Because at war, they felt part of something, deeply connected to the men and women they were serving with. Junger reflected, “humans don’t mind hardship, in fact, they thrive on it; what they mind is not feeling necessary.”140 Junger argues that “modern society has perfected the art of making people not feel necessary.”
The need to feel useful is a powerful one.  This is the hidden upside of the pathless path and a reason why finding work that aligns with what matters to you and makes you feel useful is so important. When you find the conversations you want to take part in and the work you want to keep doing, you start to feel necessary and the whole world opens up.
Remembering What You Forgot
The initial delight is in the surprise of remembering something I didn’t know I knew.
– Robert Frost
As a kid, I spent as much time as I could on the computer. After school, I ran in the door at home and sat down at the computer. I clicked the America Online logo and waited for the phone line to dial a random number somewhere in the United States. Then came the funny noises and I was in! With the World Wide Web in front of me, it was time to play.
I remember the day my father brought home a copy of DOS for Dummies. We opened the book at the computer and entered some of the commands. What a thrill! By typing in a few words, I could control the computer. I was hooked. For years afterward, I participated in a wide variety of online activities. I taught myself how to build websites and code in HTML, I joined wrestling role‑playing leagues, ran a basketball simulation league, pirated music, traded beanie babies, and sold website templates, and made my first money on the internet. I followed my curiosity wherever it took me.
As I got older I made a natural transition to working with technology and computers. Oh, wait… that’s not what happened. Instead, I followed the default path, seeking out traditional paths to success. This route went through giant companies, where cutting‑edge technology and ideas could only be used after a multi‑year planning and proposal process.  I never saw my interest in technology as something worth following in and of itself; it was always just an advantage for doing great work on my traditional path.
Looking back, I’m a bit embarrassed about ignoring my consistent curiosity towards technology. In high school, I built a weather site where I would predict snow days for my friends, called “Paul Says it Will.” In college, where I started to desire a prestigious career, I nevertheless spent my free time making DJ mixes under the name “DJ PoPo Shizzle, ran a blog with friends called S4, and learned how to code. These experiences, which were not part of the default path, clearly foreshadowed my current self‑employment in which I coach, consult, build products, and experiment online. Choosing or creating a career working with technology seems obvious now, but due to the forces shaping my desires, I couldn’t see it back then.
About two years into my self‑employment journey, I realized that most of the activities that excite me involve a computer. When I build websites, launch a podcast, create online courses, use marketing tools, and hang out with friends on Twitter, I am a kid again, sitting in front of that first computer.
My friend Jonny Miller argues that “human existence is an infinitely unfolding process of remembering, forgetting, and remembering again.”141
To thrive on the pathless path, we must ignore the shiny objects and distractions and strip away the stories that are not our own to remember who we are. One of the biggest concerns people have when they talk to me about quitting their job is how to make money. That is certainly important, but a more interesting path is possible if you start with what brought you alive in the past.  Injecting the energy from these pursuits can lead you in a different direction and can help you figure out what to work on while taking the first steps toward creating a life you truly enjoy.
You Are Creative
Here’s the truth you have to wrestle with: the reason that art (writing, engaging, leading, all of it) is valuable is precisely why I can’t tell you how to do it. If there were a map, there’d be no art, because art is the act of navigating without a map. Don’t you hate that? I love that there’s no map. – Seth Godin
You are not creative. At least this is what you tell me. But I don’t buy it. I just think you’ve been duped. We’ve lost track of our basic human creativity, convincing ourselves that only people who use certain tools or work in advertising or other artistic areas are creative.
Nonsense.
We are all creative. Navigating the bureaucracy of any institution takes a certain kind of creativity. Figuring out which emotion an emoji is expressing requires creativity. Parenting is probably one of the most creative human activities. Learning how to use technology takes creativity. As does hosting a dinner party or organizing a trip with friends, not to mention planning a wedding. If you think planning a modern-day wedding isn’t creative, I don’t know what to tell you. Detach yourself from conventional notions of what creativity means, and you’ll see it everywhere.
Another reason we struggle to see the potential for channeling creativity is that until very recently if you wanted to share your work with the world, you needed permission. You needed access to audiences or distribution channels via gatekeepers, whose sole job was to limit access.
We still haven’t fully realized how dramatically this state of affairs has changed. The internet has made it possible for people from anywhere in the world with access to the internet to create and share their ideas, stories, and creations without permission. Seth Godin puts it bluntly: “The world just gave you control over the means of production. Not to master them is a sin.”142
This book you are reading did not require anyone’s permission to be published. I just decided to do it. I wrote it myself, hired editors and designers to help me, and put my name on it as the publisher. You can do this too.
Modes of creative expression that used to require the approval of gatekeepers include publishing books or songs, selling your artwork, starting a radio show, and selling crafts to a mass market, among many others.
If you still want permission, though, I’m granting it. Go for it.
Many people struggle to start making a living from their creative endeavors because they are still operating within the logic of the default path. On the default path, you have to get the job before you can do the work. On the pathless path, you simply do the work first and then decide if you want to continue. For example, I wrote online for several years, and after several people asked if I planned to write a book, I decided to raise the stakes and take that next step. It would have been easy to say that I couldn’t get published and not bother, but I knew I was capable of writing something worth reading. Just two decades ago, I wouldn’t have been able to reach a wide audience. Consider that Stephen King was rejected by 30 publishers before someone agreed to publish his first book. It pains me to think about all the great writers worth reading that gave up before King did.
We tend to think of creativity as a predetermined ability, like someone who might have a genetic advantage to run faster. Instead, I think creativity is more of an active choice and the removal of gatekeepers means that for the first time it might take more energy to deny your own creative expression than exploring it.
A difficulty that remains, however, is figuring out how to get started. This is where people get stuck. A voice in their head asks, “What will people say?”
This is valid. It’s scary to share with the world, and if you do it over a long enough period, criticism is inevitable. At first, however, most people run into a different challenge: not having an audience at all. This can be a good thing because it enables you to experiment while building up your confidence slowly.
A deeper fear that’s harder to grapple with is the shadow of the gatekeeper system itself, which paired access to an audience with a subtle hostility towards those without the right taste, credentials, or status. While this is fading, you still see examples of this sentiment in popular media. For example, an article published in 2019 in the New York Times titled “Have we hit peak podcasts?” addressed the issue of publication without gatekeepers or restrictions: ”…the frequency with which podcasts start…has produced a degree of cultural exhaustion. We’re not necessarily sick of listening to interesting programs; but we’re definitely tired of hearing from every friend, relative and co-worker who thinks they’re just an iPhone recording away from creating the next ‘Serial.’”
The message is loud and clear. Podcasts are for serious professionals with the right credentials, and if you don’t have them, please don’t think of starting one.
We should reject this stance.
While the article makes a valid point about the challenges of making money, it ignores that someone might create something for the sake of it or as a way to learn, connect and feel alive rather than trying to get ahead or get paid.
Creative output is fuel for the pathless path. While my writing hasn’t made me famous or rich, it has been vital for staying energized and being able to connect with people that share my curiosities. Growing up, I didn’t think I was a creative person. Nor did I think I had permission to share with the world. Luckily, I stopped believing those lies and started to see that there are deeper and more important reasons to create and share. Which brings us to an important question…
Who Do You Serve?
In my first few years of writing online, I let a couple of critical comments get to me. These readers thought that my criticism of the default path was too harsh. Their disapproval stayed in my head and my writing became too safe. But eventually, I realized I wasn’t writing for them. I was writing for people like me: those struggling on the default path who want to dream bigger. When I focused on these readers, my writing improved, and I gained a broader audience.
It took me a while to figure out why this was the case but it clicked when I heard a story from Seth Godin about his friend David Chang, who owns the Momofuku Restaurant Group. When Chang first opened of his first restaurants, Godin stopped by and ordered a vegetarian version of a popular dish. Godin returned several times and enjoyed the dish until one day Chang told him, “we only serve it as‑is.” Godin was sad about not being able to eat the dish but excited for his friend. The reason? Godin knew a secret: once you figure out who you intend to serve, you can go all‑in and focus on what it takes to become great.143
Thinking we have to serve a mass audience is default path thinking. An industrial, “bigger is better” mindset assumes that everyone is competing in a mass market. In the digital world, it’s easy to envision that this mass market is the only competition for the same audiences and attention. However, even if my podcast might sit right next to NPR’s This American Life in the podcast app, what I am doing is completely different. I am a solo interviewer, editor, graphic designer, and distributor and spend less than $100 per year. NPR has more than 25 people working on that show alone. We have different goals, different audiences, and different reasons for existing.
Figuring out who you want to serve is an important element of the pathless path. On the default path, your job often provides recognition and praise. When you are on your own, without a specific job or colleagues, you may miss that kind of support. This is why it’s so important to know what kind of people you want to work with and who you want to serve. Finding the right people, those who might offer support and encouragement along the way can have an outsized effect on your confidence and courage to keep going.
I have benefited from this sort of kindness on my journey, especially early on from my aunt Debbie, Noel, Cam, Jordan, and many others. Tyler Cowen has argued that one of “the most valuable things you can do with your time and with your life” is to believe in people.144 Being a recipient of this encouragement has inspired me to create a rule for myself: any time I consume something from an individual that inspires me, I have to send them a note to let them know. Creating and sharing in public takes an incredible amount of courage and I remember how awkward and scared I was at the beginning of my journey. It’s easy to tell people what they got wrong but much harder to say “I love what you are doing. I hope you keep going and let me know if I can help.”
As I’ve continued to create, share and connect people, I’ve tapped into a hidden form of motivation, one that is invisible to others. On the default path, promotions, job changes, and raises serve as visible markers of success. However, my proof of success is hidden, coming in the form of messages I receive in my email or conversations with people who are inspired by my work. Lacking a way to “prove” that you are successful can be hard. However, the people that reach out have become my friends, my supporters, and my inspiration, and the reward is far greater than any visible metric of success from my previous path.
These are the people I’ve decided to serve and it makes my continued journey on the pathless path worth it.
The World Is Waiting
Creativity by nature is an act of boldness and rebellion. – Robert Greene
Maybe I’ve convinced you that you are creative and that you should ignore the voices that tell you that you should not create. However, you still have some concerns, especially if you are thinking about sharing online. Isn’t the internet just filled with scammers or people that want attention?
The fact that those people make you feel uneasy is a good sign. Because the people creating those posts probably don’t feel uneasy at all. And this is why I want to urge you to consider sharing with the world. You care. You want to do things in good faith. You want to help people, to listen, and connect with others who share your passions. This doesn’t mean you need to build an audience or a business, but what might emerge if you dare to share your writing, painting, dancing, crafts, or other acts of creativity with others? What friends might you meet? What opportunities could you pursue? What communities could you join?
The positive side of earning a living by creating and sharing online or building an online business is often obscured by the logic of the default path, in which the worthiest endeavor is a full‑time job. Consider two different people: a mid‑level financial analyst at Wells Fargo and someone building a yoga business through Instagram. What’s your honest reaction to both people? If you’re like I was before I started working on my own, you’d probably be slightly judgmental of the Instagram influencer. Now, I’ve softened my stance. I’ve realized the yoga influencer puts their entire reputation at risk and succeeds or fails based on their decisions. As this kind of work becomes more prevalent, our norms will shift and we will question why we are more skeptical of an entrepreneur than the employee at Wells Fargo, a place that has been cited more than 200 times in the last 20 years for fraud, mortgage abuse, and violating investor rights.145
Let’s recall Ben Hunt’s argument that these conventional, full‑time paths are no longer industrially necessary, but simply industrially preferable. If we continue to anchor our imagination to default path stories about work, we will continue to ignore the possible paths for our lives.
Even if you do decide that sharing your real work with the world is worthwhile, it’s nearly impossible to overcome the sense that you may embarrass yourself. Here it’s helpful to remember the “spirit of the fool” and also consider that many people around the world might be waiting for what you have to share.
My public writing journey started on an app called Quora, where I answered users’ questions across a wide range of topics. For years I answered the occasional question, mostly on topics I knew a lot about. As I started to enjoy writing more, I created a challenge for myself, answering at least one question at the start of every workday. I expanded the range of topics I wrote about and finally shared a lengthy reflection on my previous health challenges. It was the most vulnerable piece I had ever shared publicly.146 It had been sitting in a document on my computer for more than two years. I had been scared to share it, convinced that no one would want to read it and that people might make fun of me. But the post reached half a million people and I got countless messages and comments thanking me for sharing:
What an inspirational account. Write a book!!! Thank you so much for sharing, this was truly an enriching read.
It’s one of the most amazing and thoughtful answers I’ve read in a while. Thank you for having the courage of sharing it and I wish you the best.
Just commenting to say that this was an excellent answer/post, and thanks for writing it.
I’m not sick, but I really needed to read this. Wonderful! All the best in your career. I wish I could meet more people in person like you!
Real heroes are ordinary people who had to face extraordinary problems but never gave up and survived. This is you, Paul. Bless you, my friend.
As I read the comments, I realized many people around the world see courage in creation and sharing, and these are the people I now write for.
And this group is diverse. As I’ve explored a broader range of topics such as self‑employment, freelancing, our relationship with work, and building an online business, I’ve met people from 13 to 75 years old, from the United States to New Zealand to Pakistan to China. As increasing numbers of people all around the world are tapping into the opportunities created by the internet, they are also looking for people like them. There has never been a better and easier time to find and connect with people in a positive way.
So maybe I’ve convinced you that it’s worth sharing, but you don’t want to launch a social media brand, start writing online, or publish a book. That’s fine too. You can start small or do something in your local community. Host a dinner party in your city or town, start a book club, share a poem or essay you’ve written with a couple of close friends, or even join a local art class. It doesn’t matter how you start but that you start. Once people enter this new, creative mode, they realize that they’ve been holding back a part of themselves for most of their lives. Deep inside, we all have a desire to engage with the world in creative ways and don’t worry, I’m here to cheer you on.
Virtuous Meaning Cycles
Maria Popova, who writes the popular site The Marginalian (formerly Brain Pickings), spends her days reading old books and essays. She’s passionate about finding ideas, beauty, and wisdom in these texts and then connecting them in her own unique conversation with the world.
Her reflections on the connection between critical thinking and hope in an interview with Krista Tippett on the On Being podcast helped me transform how I wanted to engage with the world. She argued, “critical thinking without hope is cynicism. But hope without critical thinking is naïveté.”147 I hit rewind and listened to this several times. I knew she was talking to me.
When I first started on my path and began writing, I was driven by frustration. I saw problems with the way we think about work and our lives everywhere, and I wanted everyone to see things like I did. I wanted to be right. My essays and articles were convincing, but they were not inspiring.
It was critical thinking without hope.
This desire for intellectual exploration with others has been a big theme on my journey. But not until I added hope to my critical thinking and embraced a more expansive view of the world did I attract the kind of people I wanted to welcome into my conversation. In my first couple of months in Taiwan, I read a book on writing by William Zinsser. He urged me to “believe in your own identity and your own opinions. Writing is an act of ego, and you might as well admit it. Use its energy to keep yourself going.”148
In that single moment, I stopped hedging my bets. I would no longer fear what people might think, but I would also leave my cynical edge behind. After reading Zinsser, I put my heart into my writing and made my case. This was the way out of cynicism. I became more optimistic not because I started to write better or was right, but because I stopped hiding. I led with my curiosity, vulnerability, and passion and it immediately attracted the kind of people I wanted to meet.
In the early 1900s, professor and writer Bertrand Russell noted that “any person who visits the Universities of the Western world is liable to be struck by the fact that the intelligent young of the present day are cynical to a far greater extent than was the case formerly.”149
He argued that developing a cynical stance was necessary in a world in which much of what authorities and leaders claim directly contrasts with what is true. The cure for such cynicism, he said, would “only come when intellectuals can find a career that embodies their creative impulses.”150
This is possible on the pathless path. You can experiment with your work and your life until you stumble into a virtuous cycle that helps you continue to move in a positive direction. By a virtuous cycle, I mean being able to do work that you enjoy that naturally leads to opportunities and people that help make your life better.
The biggest challenge to creating your virtuous cycle and one of the most dangerous failure modes of the pathless path is cynicism. Many people who leave the default path do so because they’ve become cynical and are driven by a desire to escape. But escaping is only the first step of leaving a certain path behind. In order to create a sustainable journey and path, it requires finding ways of orienting to the world that leave space for hope.
At the beginning of my journey, I wanted to prove people wrong and that my way of living life was good and right. My writing was cynical because I couldn’t express why I cared about those ideas. I was depending more on facts than the songs singing in my soul. When I was brave enough to open my heart, I got more support and that led not only to a better path but a more exciting future.

10
Playing the Long Game
When I quit the New York Times to be a full-time mother, the voices of the world said that I was nuts. When I quit it again to be a full-time novelist, they said I was nuts again. But I am not nuts. I am happy. I am successful on my own terms. Because if your success is not on your own terms, if it looks good to the world but does not feel good in your heart, it is not success at all. – Anna Quindlen
Working Backward
One of the goals of the pathless path is to make commitments: to a type of work, ways of living, creative projects, or a “conversation” with the world. A challenge here, however, is that the possibilities are so vast. Which raises a question: how do you begin to figure out what you want to do when there are not many limits?
On the default path, the kinds of work you can do and the resulting kinds of lives that are possible are limited, helping to simplify this issue. I never realized how much I was constraining my imagination when I was only considering paths or jobs that already existed. Embracing the pathless path enabled me to see the possibilities for my life. This was exciting but also overwhelming. I often have the sense that I’d need multiple lifetimes to truly test and explore my options.
Instead of embarking on an endless search, I’ve taken a different approach: working backward. Instead of thinking about what I want to do and how I want to live, I start instead with what I don’t want to be doing and what failure looks like. By looking at what might go wrong with our lives, we can avoid obvious traps, creating more space for things to go right.
One useful mental model for thinking about this is the principle of inversion, popularized by German mathematician Carl Jacobi. He told his students to “invert, always invert,” encouraging them to approach difficult problems by inverting the equation to gain a new perspective.151 We can also apply this principle to our lives. For example, instead of asking what makes up an amazing life, we first define the worst‑case scenario and then work backward. What does a miserable life entail? What actions would make achieving such a life more likely? Then figure out how you can avoid these things from becoming true.
During my time on the default path, I often imagined a future version of myself that I knew I didn’t want to be: an overweight guy in his 50s who barely tolerates the people in his life, hates his job, spends his days in a windowless cubicle farm, and isn’t very happy. If you had known me then, you would have said I would never have ended up like that. However, by the time I left my job I was much closer to that person than when I started.
On the pathless path, I take this exercise much more seriously. While the grumpy guy in the cubicle is even harder to imagine now, there are still aspects of him that I want to avoid. Here is my current sketch of the person I don’t want to be ten years from now:
Paul is still committed to the pathless path, a fact that still draws skepticism from other people. He has a couple of kids, but is barely making ends meet and is ashamed of this fact. He goes a few months every year without income and is filled with insecurity about his finances almost all the time. He’s too stubborn to take a full‑time job and instead of admitting he might be wrong about his approach to life, he angrily tweets about how stupid everyone is working in traditional jobs. This is all complicated by ongoing health issues which limit his energy and sometimes leave him semi‑bedridden for weeks at a time.
The negative future version of me is financially insecure, does not have a predictable income, and is cynical and stubborn. I could become “negative me” by doing the following: spending time with negative and cynical people, not finding supportive friends, not staying open to all kinds of paid work (including full‑time employment), obsessing over divisive media and politics, working on things I resent, and not being honest about my own motivations. Inverting helps you identify traps that could derail your efforts to keep your journey alive.
I encourage everyone to write a description of the person you don’t want to be, then brainstorm actions that might create that outcome. This exercise may be uncomfortable because undoubtedly you will see traces of the person you imagine in your present life. These traces are clues about what to change in your life right now.
In addition to identifying who we don’t want to become, we should seek to identify ways of working and living that might add unnecessary risk to our path. Early in my journey, I identified being a freelancer and having a single type of income as a key risk. This motivated me to try to make money in as many ways as possible, even if it meant sacrificing short‑term income to do so.
I was inadvertently embracing a principle that professor Nassim Taleb calls “antifragility.” Antifragility is a well‑documented natural phenomenon in which things gain strength through disorder. For example, cities are antifragile. While individual businesses in a city may fail in an individual year, the city thrives over the long‑term, fueled by new residents, buildings, and businesses.
Like a city with many industries, I want to be resilient to changes in income, shifts in the economy, and rule changes from various platforms that I use. For this reason, in addition to freelancing work, I’ve built things that allow me to generate income without selling my time and that target different audiences. The first two years after shifting away from freelancing with this approach, my overall income declined substantially. However, a few years later, I now have between eight and ten different ways of making money where I consistently earn at least $200 a month. While the risks of any one of these disappearing is high, the odds that all of them disappear at once is low.
Early on in my journey, I realized that my entire goal was to stay on the pathless path indefinitely. This is what author James Carse calls the “infinite game”: “A finite game is played for the purpose of winning, an infinite game for the purpose of continuing the play.”152 By working backward, I realized that the biggest risks for me are spending my time doing things that undermine my ability to stay optimistic and energized, and obviously, running out of money. This is why I’ve spent so much time focusing on creating the conditions for success and lowering my risk of failure, rather than aiming at success itself.
Almost everyone that stays on the pathless path eventually adopts a similar approach. The reason? The longer you stay on the path, the higher your odds you’ll be able to sustain it over the long term. People come to realize that the challenge is not to find work to pay the bills but instead to have time to keep taking chances and exploring opportunities to find the things worth committing to over the long-term.
The Positive Side of Freedom
In the paycheck world, there used to be a saying: dress for the job you want, not the job you have. The analogous idea in the free agent world is: learn to exercise the freedoms you might acquire, not just the freedoms you have. – Venkatesh Rao
Beyond money, the second most common concern people have about working less or building a life less centered around work is what they will do with their time. On the default path, we may not realize how much energy it requires to simply go through the motions and stay on the path, so it’s easy to mistake our lack of energy outside of work for a lack of interest in anything else. As a result, we don’t know what we’ll do when we’re no longer “working.”
The problem of what to do once you have freedom is something that fascinated writer Erich Fromm. In his book Escape from Freedom, he explores how millions across the world struggled to adapt to the newfound freedom they had in their lives in the 1930s.
At this time, people were experiencing greater freedom as the control of religious authorities diminished, workweeks became shorter, and increased prosperity provided new options for living. Many believed that the end of World War I had concluded the struggle for freedom and the only problem left was what to do with it.
Well‑educated elites and business owners liberated from the rules of rigid institutions were thrilled, but many others were frustrated. Fromm noticed that many people felt “isolated, powerless, and an instrument of purposes outside of [themselves], alienated from [themselves] and others.”153 To political leaders like Hitler and Stalin, this was great news. They could increase their own power by manipulating the masses with stories that helped them make sense of their lives.
Why would so many people trade some of their newfound freedom to join these authoritarian movements? Fromm argued that the reason lied behind two different types of freedom. First was negative freedom or “freedom from” outside control. Second was positive freedom or the “freedom to” engage with the world in a way that is true to yourself.” Fromm’s positive version of freedom was much more than the freedom to act. He described it as “the full realization of the individual’s potential, together with his ability to live actively and spontaneously.” Fromm argued that those freed from oppression but unable to develop a positive version of freedom were destined to be filled with feelings of separateness and anxiety.154
People are willing to compromise a lot to suppress these feelings. The stories Nazism offered the masses in the 1930s relieved people of their responsibility to grapple with “freedom to” and make their own decisions. In exchange, the autocratic leaders gave them a script for how to live. Fromm, who was writing at the beginning of World War II, thought this a terrible mistake, even at the time: “because we have freed ourselves of the older overt forms of authority, we do not see that we have become the prey of a new kind of authority.”155 Abdicating our responsibility to live our own lives can have dire consequences.
Over the last 100 years, the number of ways you can engage with life has exploded beyond imagination. Now, not only political leaders offer narratives for interacting with the world, but also employers, companies, media outlets, and other institutions. Everyone gives you roadmaps for living life and becoming free. You just have to buy their products, embrace their story, or join their company, and instead of having to develop your own agency, the respective institution will make you part of their special group. In his post-World War II writing, Fromm demonstrated that, surprisingly, the urge to conform in this way was most powerful not in Communist societies, but in the West.
The problem with conformity, Fromm argued, is that it leads to an existence that is too rigid, routine, and predictable. This undermines the space for spontaneity and active engagement that might help one discover what matters at a deeper level. David Foster Wallace once argued that this is the whole point of a liberal arts education in perhaps the best defense of this tradition:
I submit that this is what the real, no‑bullshit value of your liberal arts education is supposed to be about: how to keep from going through your comfortable, prosperous, respectable adult life dead, unconscious, a slave to your head and to your natural default setting of being uniquely, completely, imperially alone day in and day out.156
Wallace’s point is that doing what almost everyone else is doing is the natural thing in life. If we are serious about other approaches, it will take work.
In his own writing, Fromm continued to explore the topic of freedom for several decades after World War II. In his book The Art of Loving, he argued that the root of a positive version of freedom is a deep sense of connectedness with the world. A path to achieve this state was through “creative activity.” He offered examples: “whether a carpenter makes a table, or a goldsmith a piece of jewelry, whether the peasant grows his corn or the painter paints a picture, in all types of creative work the worker and his object become one, man unites himself with the world in the process of creation.” As he said, in a world where we are pushed to “regard our personal qualities and the result of our efforts as commodities that can be sold for money, prestige, and power,” engaging in a creative endeavor allows us to find value in the act itself.157
I’ve already made a case for you to find a way to create, either publicly or privately. However, Fromm presents another deeper reason. In addition to doing something challenging, “finding the others,” or discovering a different kind of work you enjoy, you might also find a mode of being that opens you up to a deeper relationship with the world and yourself. In this way, the creative act is one of the most sacred things in the world and should be taken seriously in itself and not with any expected outcome.
Before I left my job, I was exploring my creativity but did not feel the deeper connectedness that Fromm wrote about. I was convinced that escaping my job was the most important thing I had to do. However, soon after achieving the “freedom from” traditional employment, I discovered the vastness and challenge of developing a positive side of freedom.
Ultimately, figuring out what to do with freedom once we have it is one of the biggest challenges of the pathless path. Writer Simon Sarris argues that we can only do this by increasing our capacity for agency, or our ability to take deliberate action in the world. He argues, “the secret of the world is that it is a very malleable place, we must be sure that people learn this, and never forget the order: Learning is naturally the consequence of doing.”158 In other words, only by taking action do we learn and only by learning do we discover what we want. Without this, we will struggle to take advantage of the freedom that the pathless path offers. We are ultimately the ones that determine our fate, and without expressing agency, we struggle to be free.
In the arc of history, the freedom to explore the possibilities of our lives is a relatively recent phenomenon. For the amount of attention that the idea of freedom receives, there is still relatively little expression of it at the individual level. The default path has given us the freedom to earn money and spend it as we please, work in different fields, and have some control over our lives, but keeps many trapped in a pseudo‑freedom where one is free from absolute oppression but not free enough to act with a high degree of agency.
The pathless path is the deliberate pursuit of a positive version of freedom. Revisiting Fromm’s definition, “the full realization of the individual’s potential, together with his ability to live actively and spontaneously,” we see that developing our own sense of agency is vital.159 Thus, figuring out what to do with your time is a real concern.
For this, I’ve found no better advice than the following from Dolly Parton: “Find out who you are and do it on purpose.”160
Reinventing Who You Are
Imagine it’s 1980. You are 22 years old, freshly graduated from college. You take a job at General Motors, one of the biggest companies in the world. On your first day, you walk into your office and see a flat metal desk with an electronic typewriter, a rotary phone, and a physical inbox with two slots, one for incoming memos and the other for outgoing.
You spend the next 20 years at General Motors and receive several promotions. When computers are introduced, you volunteer to be an early adopter and do your best to stay up to date with the latest technology. Despite this, you get laid off in the 2001 recession and spend the next ten years jumping between different automotive parts suppliers. In 2010, you join a startup that builds driverless cars because they’re looking for someone with industry connections. You feel like you’re operating at the edge of your competence, but you manage to get by. In 2015, your career comes full circle when you re-join General Motors to help your old manager with a new product line.
In 2020, your entire team starts working remotely. You learn how to use Zoom and Slack, and you seem to know what you’re doing on both your computer and mobile phone. You are shocked at how quickly the younger team members adapt to this new normal. You can keep up, but you find it all exhausting. You sense it might be time to hang it up and decide that at the end of 2020, you will retire.
Here’s a question for you: do you think the next forty years will see more or less change?
When we think about the future, we tend to underestimate how much things will change, especially for ourselves. Researchers call this the “end of history illusion.” Across all age groups, people indicate that they have experienced profound change in the past but when they forecast their future, they don’t see the trend continuing. People believe that “the pace of personal change has slowed to a crawl and that they have recently become the people they will remain.”161
What can we do with this knowledge? For me, it’s made me more enthusiastic about embracing the pathless path because if I’m going to change more than I can expect, I might as well attempt to shape those changes. This is an alternative to how many people deal with change: by denying, delaying, or rejecting it. As we age we do become more mentally rigid and minor challenges to our routines can be landmines threatening to blow up our weeks, and suggestions that we live in new ways are treated as acts of war.
Moving abroad, running my own business, and living in more than 20 places in only a few years have made me much more resilient to change and more aware of my own default to become rigid in my thinking.  I’ve become more capable of proactively embracing change, but I’d be lying if I said I am excited about every new shift in my environment, schedule, and work. Nonetheless, I’ve come to see reinvention as one of the most valuable meta‑skills worth developing, and on the other side of these experiments, I am often much more relaxed and confident than before.
Professor and author Yuval Harari argued that “in order to keep up with the world of 2050, you will need not merely to invent new ideas and products, but above all to reinvent yourself again and again.”162 Nothing has helped me improve this skill more than living in other countries. People often ask me how to prepare for living abroad. My response? You can’t, and when you leave the place you know, you will inevitably face challenges. From forgetting my passport on the other side of Italy to a stray dog biting me in Taiwan and a parasite infection in Mexico, I’ve dealt with scary uncertainty head-on. I wouldn’t encourage you to seek out these experiences, but it does raise a question: if coping with these challenges increased my confidence, is comfort overrated?
As more people invent new paths and enter new environments, communities, and online worlds, many will be forced out of their comfort zone. The sooner this happens the better because the era of living your entire life in a small, local, and familiar community is over.
Whether we want to or not, we’ll have to keep reinventing ourselves.
Embracing Abundance
My cousin has a saying that has always stuck with me: “it will even out when we are dead.” More than fatalism, this is an invitation to a relationship built on generosity, one that’s deeper than keeping a balance of accounts. Developing such a spirit of generosity and a mindset of abundance is increasingly a challenge in today’s world, where much of what we do is filtered by how much things cost and how we “spend” our time.
This way of seeing the world is the result of a slow but steady transformation of how we relate to both time and the economy. Until the 1600s when clocks became ubiquitous, people rarely thought about time. English historian E.P. Thompson noted that instead, people thought in terms of activities. In Madagascar, a half-hour was a “rice cooking,” and a brief moment was “frying a locust.” When they had clocks, people increasingly thought about time as something related to money. Thompson noted that “time is now currency, it is not passed but spent.”163
Today we think about how we “spend” time, if we are getting “our money’s worth,” if we are getting or giving value, and the “cost” of our actions. By equating time with money, we can make trade‑offs, calculations, and coordinate global meetings, but we also decrease any sense of abundance. This shift has coincided with incredible advancements in our economy and its ability to deploy almost anything we want across the world, but at the same time has undermined our own security. In the 1970s, academic turned farmer Wendell Berry wrote about how economic success includes the hidden cost of depriving people “of any independent access to the staples of life: clothing, shelter, food, even water.”164 What was once the riches of self‑reliance have become things with a price.
Figuring out how to escape these patterns of thinking is vital to keeping the pathless path journey alive. I’ve done this over the past few years by looking at generosity as not merely a trait, but a skill that needs to be practiced. Practicing this skill has opened me up to a hidden side of life, filled not only with abundance, but also meaningful connection.
I realized that this skill is worth practicing when I read a book called Sacred Economics by Charles Eisenstein. In it, he introduces the idea of a gift economy which he argues has been with humans for ages. He compares it to our default economic mindset:
Whereas money today embodies the principle, “More for me is less for you,” in a gift economy, more for you is also more for me because those who have, give to those who need it. Gifts cement the mystical realization of participation in something greater than oneself which, yet, is not separate from oneself. The axioms of rational self-interest change because the self has expanded to include something of the other.165
Most of us have experienced this type of gift‑giving in our families. As children, very little is asked of us in the economic realm. Even as we grow into adulthood, it would be odd for our parents to keep meticulous track of what we owe them. Similarly, among close friends, there is often an unspoken acknowledgment that aiming for absolute fairness is never the goal. Like my cousin, for whom “it will even out when we are dead,” we see the wisdom in supporting deeper relationships.
However, operating in the spirit of a gift economy outside of our close connections is uncomfortable and it’s probably not something we should embrace in the broadest sense. If we had to form deep, meaningful relationships with everyone we interacted with within the economy, it would grind to a halt. However, the opposite is also true. When we look to the market to solve all our needs, it leaves us feeling empty. Professor Tim Wu made this point in a widely read essay titled “The Tyranny of Convenience,” where he argues that convenience, “with its promise of smooth, effortless efficiency…threatens to erase the sort of struggles and challenges that help give meaning to life.”166
Wu argues that many see convenience as a form of liberation. People aim for “financial independence” only to realize when they achieve it that they’re only independent in the narrow sense of being able to pay for everything. Realizing the flaws in this kind of economic thinking and inspired by writers like Eisenstein and Berry, I decided to experiment with the gift economy in my work. Based on Eisenstein’s book, I embraced three guiding principles:
Find ways to give without expectation of anything in return.
Be willing to receive gifts in any form and on any timeline.
Be open to being wrong about all of this and adjust my approach as necessary.
With this in mind, I looked for places to give what I had to offer. My first practical experiment with the gift economy involved a spontaneous decision at the end of a coffee conversation with a stranger I met through the Couchsurfing app in Boston. She shared that she was running out of money and had been making a living working on various projects and relying on the kindness of strangers as she traveled around the United States. As we were about to part ways, I asked her, “Would you be comfortable receiving a cash gift from me?” A bit shocked, she said yes. I sent her $100 via a payment app and walked away.
When the thought first popped into my head, I noticed inner voices that told me it was a bad idea: “What if she wastes the money?” “Won’t this make her too lazy to take a job that might help her?” “She doesn’t deserve it.” Until that moment, I had always listened to those voices and leaned away from discomfort. However, this is the whole point of embracing the gift mindset and practicing generosity. It exposes our default scripts about how we think the world should work and opens us up to new possibilities.
A couple weeks later I received an unprompted message. She told me that she had used the money to become a member on HomeAway, a site where hosts offer free lodging and food in exchange for work, typically no more than 4-5 hours per day, in places like farms, restaurants, and hotels. She had found a place that would host her for a couple of months and she was pretty excited about it.
Partly because in today’s world most people donate to formal charities, giving directly feels weird. Many charitable organizations are set up like businesses and use the same marketing tactics. Giving $100 to a charity online feels normal and comfortable. Handing over a $100 bill to a stranger feels reckless. “What if they____________?” Fill in the blank with your preferred worry. While I’ve never fully overcome these voices, giving to strangers over and over again has shown me that our default assumptions often stop us from doing things that are not only good and meaningful but might even make our lives better.
Eisenstein argues that in a gift economy, “gifts flow toward the greatest need,” and in learning to deal with the discomfort of a gifting mindset, I’ve been able to more clearly see those who might need some help while also being on the receiving end of unexpected offers of generosity from people from around the world.
I’ve also embraced the spirit of a gift economy in my work.  I run an online course that’s priced for knowledge workers based in the Western economy. For many of the people taking the course, the price is much less than a day’s salary. Yet for people in other countries, it can be more than a month’s salary. From the beginning, I integrated a gift economy approach into my course. In my first iteration, I included an option to “click here if you can’t afford this and I’ll send you a free version of the course.” As you might expect, no one purchased the course and requests flowed in steadily. Unfortunately, no one ever opened the course either.
To design a better approach, I applied what I had learned in my interactions with philosopher Andrew Taggart.167 I introduced language saying that I wanted anyone motivated to learn to be able to access the course. I created an online exercise that shared my own goals (“to support my life doing this kind of teaching and creative work”) and included questions about their motivation and their plan for finishing the course as well as space to share their financial challenges if they wished. At the end of the exercise, I asked them three questions:
What is the low range of a price you would be willing to offer for an online course?
What is the high range of a price you would be willing to offer for an online course?
What is a gift that “feels right” for this course that you are able to give wholeheartedly?
In contrast to my free offer, which ended up being a quick transaction that didn’t help anyone, this version enabled people to get to know me on a deeper level and share a bit about themselves. It was an invitation to a deeper relationship. In the past few years, I’ve received nearly 500 submissions and the applications never cease to amaze me.
One person from Vietnam said that the course costs more than their monthly salary. Impressed with my generosity, however, this person detailed a plan to repay me over the coming years. The response explained how the course would further the person’s career and increase their salary. In such cases, I try to give them the course for free or in exchange for small gifts. Yet the amount of generosity that exists in the world always blows me away. All you have to do is open yourself up to this mode of being.
Seth Godin reminds us that the internet has “lowered the marginal cost of generosity” and I’m not sure most people realize the potential of this development. In the near future, people will have public digital wallets, and transmitting cash to someone we know or just met will be an ordinary event. This is why thinking about generosity as a skill and looking for opportunities to practice is important.
To understand the power of a gift, you must first open yourself up to receive. This is easier said than done. Opening yourself to generosity often means grappling with your own insecurities about not feeling responsible. When I first started writing publicly, I created a Patreon, which allows people to make micro‑donations to support someone’s work. I announced this in the context of my plan to embrace the gift economy. Within hours of sending this first email, two friends, Jordan and Noel, immediately supported me for $3 a month. Their support wasn’t going to secure my future, but the effects were profound. A feeling of gratitude filled my heart. Their small vote of confidence increased mine as well. I also felt like I needed to pay them back, not monetarily but with my courage to keep going on my path.
Eisenstein also realized the significance of relationships within the gift economy:
One thing that gifts do is that they create ties among people — which is different from a financial transaction. If I buy something from you, I give you the money and you give me the thing, and we have no more relationship after that. I don’t owe you anything, you don’t owe me anything. The transaction is finished. But if you give me something, that’s different because now I kind of feel like I owe you one. It could be a feeling of obligation, or you could say it’s a feeling of gratitude. 168
The benefits of embracing the spirit of a gift economy are invisible to the people who ask me how I plan to monetize, scale, and grow my business. I’m not in the business of being a business. I’m embracing the work of building a life and all of the connections that will make that meaningful.
When you find the work you want to keep doing, what makes it meaningful is that you are drawn to do it for its own sake. Seth Godin says that each of us carries an artist inside for whom it is imperative that we find the work we want to keep doing. Godin claims that this work is about more than getting paid: “You cannot create a piece of art merely for money. Doing it as part of commerce so denudes art of wonder that it ceases to be art.”169
Beyond appreciating the work you want to do, embracing the spirit of a gift economy is a way to transcend our modern default assumptions about our value in the world to allow wonder, creativity, and connection to emerge and plant seeds inside us and the people around us. Through experiments over the past five years, I’ve realized that not only is generosity a skill worth practicing, but it has compounding benefits over time.
I agree with what Eisenstein noted in his study of gift economies “it’s the generous person who is the wealthiest.”170 The world may not fully agree, but at least in my little corner of the world, I can pretend it’s true and have a little more fun.
Coming Alive Over Getting Ahead
The true scholar grudges every opportunity of action passed by, as a loss of power.
– Ralph Waldo Emerson
Everyone on the pathless path eventually needs to develop a strategy for approaching their journey. On the pathless path, once you open yourself up to possibilities and start experimenting with different ways of working and living, the biggest problem is the paradox of choice. There are too many interesting things worth doing and too many places to visit. To prioritize, developing a set of principles to help you make decisions is essential.
My personal principles are sprinkled throughout this book. These ideas, principles, questions, and mental models for how I think about everything from money to relationships to work are always evolving and shifting.
One of my most important is the mantra “coming alive over getting ahead.” I embraced this fundamental shift when I left my previous path, and the mantra reminds me that I don’t want to create another job for myself.
When I see an opportunity to make money, scale something, charge more money, or move faster, this phrase reminds me to explore all possibilities first, including doing nothing.
In April of 2020, the online consulting skills course I created 18 months earlier started making more money, driven by the widespread adoption of remote work during the Covid‑19 pandemic. I had been tinkering with the course for a couple of years at that point but never expected it to be anything more than a minor side project. Yet for almost all of 2020, the course generated an average of $5,000 per month, giving me a clear signal that it was more sustainable than I thought.
As someone with more than ten years of experience in the business world, every bone in my body was telling me to think about how to grow it further. At the end of the year, I was invited to join an intensive course and coaching group for people generating consistent income through online courses. The leaders felt that I had an opportunity to make a lot more money by taking a different approach with my course. I agreed with their assessment, but something was holding me back.
Before committing, I spent a couple of days reflecting on the decision, asking myself, “What would I end up doing with the increased earnings?” I decided I would use the time to write. Then I realized that there was nothing stopping me from doing that at that moment. So I decided that instead of scaling my course, I would write this book.
Coming alive over getting ahead.
After my initial frenzied efforts to land freelance projects, I reflexively said “no” to many paths to making more money. This meant more financial insecurity, but I was doing it because I didn’t want to fall into the trap of creating another “job” for myself. This ultimately paid off as the space I created enabled me to be creative, become more resilient, and find a positive way to engage with my work and the world.
At many steps along the journey, when I see an opportunity to make more money or pursue something that would require me to scale beyond a “company of one,” I pause. I spent ten years on a path where making numbers go up was always the way forward. Now I’m on a path where that is one option of many, and as I’ve experienced the beauty and aliveness of opening myself up to different modes of life such as creating, non-doing, and connecting with others, I now understand clearly the value of doing things outside of work.
This is one thing I think people get wrong about keeping options open. On the default path, optionality can be a trap. This is because you are trapped within your own career narrative. On the pathless path, however, optionality can pay consistent dividends because you are not holding out for another job but leaving space for a little more life.
Create Your Own Culture
Why am I doing all this? Why does it matter so much?
I have bold aspirations. They may not be legible, measurable, or understandable to you, but they give my life a direction and a purpose.
In sum, the goal of being on this path is:
Being able to get to a state of being where I can spend almost all my time helping, supporting, and inspiring others to do great things with their lives.
This is why Tuesdays with Morrie makes me cry every time I read it. Because I think Professor Morrie Schwartz pulled it off.
When writer Mitch Albom saw his old professor on TV, he was shocked to see someone who had left a strong impression on him many years earlier but had drifted out of his life.
Morrie was on NBC’s program Nightline sharing the lessons he had learned since being diagnosed with Lou Gehrig’s disease, associated with a steady decline and eventual death. Albom wondered how sixteen years had passed since they had last seen each other. He knew he had to see Morrie as soon as possible.
During those sixteen years, Albom had become a successful sportswriter and entertainer. He had a column at the Detroit Free Press, had written multiple books, and even made appearances on radio and television shows. Work was his life:
I stopped renting. I started buying. I bought a house on a hill. I bought cars. I invested in stocks and built a portfolio. I was cranked to a fifth gear, and everything I did, I did on a deadline. I exercised like a demon. I drove my car at breakneck speed. I made more money than I had ever figured to see. I met a dark‑haired woman named Janine who somehow loved me despite my schedule and the constant absences. We married after a seven‑year courtship. I was back to work a week after the wedding. I told her – and myself – that we would one day start a family, something she wanted very much. But that day never came.
Instead, I buried myself in accomplishments, because with accomplishments, I believed I could control things, I could squeeze in every last piece of happiness before I got sick and died, like my uncle before me, which I figured was my natural fate.171
Albom was succeeding on the default path. Yet seeing Morrie on the screen ignited a personal crisis. He reflected on his dreams of becoming a musician, joining the Peace Corps, and living in beautiful places: “I traded lots of dreams for a bigger paycheck, and I never even realized I was doing it.”172
Drawn perhaps by his own yearning to ask deeper questions about his life, or by a hunch that there was something more to find, or that his own emerging conversation with the world might lead to wisdom, he headed to Cambridge, Massachusetts, to talk with Morrie.
Albom planned one visit, but Morrie insisted he come back. Their conversations, held over a period of several weeks, would turn into a book called Tuesdays with Morrie, with millions of copies sold worldwide. The book is powerful not only because of Morrie’s passion for life, but also Albom’s own transformation. He and Morrie discussed the same challenges and questions that I dealt with over the past several years that I’ve explored in this book.
In one significant quote, Morrie reflects on the difference between living and dying:
“Dying,” Morrie suddenly said, “is only one thing to be sad over, Mitch. Living unhappily is something else. So many of the people who come to visit me are unhappy.” Why? “Well, for one thing, the culture we have does not make people feel good about themselves. We’re teaching the wrong things. And you have to be strong enough to say if the culture doesn’t work, don’t buy it. Create your own.”173
If the culture doesn’t work, don’t buy it.  Create your own.
This is what the pathless path is all about. It’s having the courage to walk away from an identity that seems to make sense in the context of the default path in order to aspire towards things you don’t understand.  It’s to experiment in new ways, to remix your own path, to develop your own personal definition of freedom, and to dare to have faith that it will be okay, no matter how much skepticism, insecurity, or fear you face.
Morrie pulled it off too. He created his own culture.  A Brandeis professor on the surface with the spirit of the pathless path underneath. Here is how Albom described Morrie’s world:
Morrie, true to these words, had developed his own culture – long before he got sick. Discussion groups, walks with friends, dancing to his music in the Harvard Square church. He started a project called Greenhouse, where poor people could receive mental health services. He read books to find new ideas for his classes, visited with colleagues, kept up with old students, wrote letters to distant friends. He took more time eating and looking at nature and wasted no time in front of TV sitcoms or “Movies of the Week.” He had created a cocoon of human activities – conversation, interaction, affection – and it filled his life like an overflowing soup bowl.174
Morrie lived life to its fullest. He didn’t have any regrets when he lost the ability to sing, dance, swim, and walk. He told Albom, “I may be dying, but I am surrounded by loving, caring souls. How many people can say that?”175 These conversations affected Albom profoundly, convincing him to change his mindset completely:
And you know, you can either choose to just see the world as all gloom, but I think I learned from Morrie early on that, you know, he was dying from Lou Gehrig’s disease and…he couldn’t move, he couldn’t – he had to be lifted out of a chair. He had to have someone wipe his rear end. And he was eminently upbeat and positive and still looking to his dying day to the – to the positivity of people and the goodness of people. And I thought if he could do that in a chair where he can’t move…then certainly with health and so many blessings, I can certainly be optimistic and try to be inspiring to people, too.176
After Morrie passed, Albom created more space in his life for activities not centered around work and dedicated himself to broadening the circle of people he sought to help. He started multiple charities to support disadvantaged children, volunteered with organizations that assist the homeless, and helped start an orphanage in Haiti. While he never had kids himself, in 2013 Albom adopted one of the residents of the orphanage in Haiti after she was diagnosed with brain cancer. She came to live with him and his wife in the United States. Although she lost her life, this pushed Albom to continue sharing the wisdom of the people who have come into his life and to be an inspiration to others.
He was following Morrie’s advice: Create your own culture.
Those words have stuck with me. When I was working as a consultant, I researched organizational culture. While often misunderstood in the business world, the concept of culture is pretty straightforward. It consists of an evolving set of assumptions that people use to make decisions. And the result of those actions is what shapes the culture.
To create your own culture on the pathless path you must identify the assumptions you make in your approach to life. Here are some of my assumptions, many of which have been sprinkled throughout this book:
Many people are capable of more than they believe.
Creativity is a real path to optimism, meaning, and connection.
We don’t need permission to engage with the world and people around us.
We are all creative, and it takes some people longer to figure that out.
Leisure, or active contemplation, is one of the most important things in life,
There are many ways to make money, and when an obvious path emerges, there is often a more interesting path not showing itself.
Finding the work that matters to us is the real work of our lives.
Could I be wrong about these things? Definitely. But the pathless path is not about being right. It’s about finding ideas and principles worth committing to and seeing where you end up. Without doing this, you are accepting the logic of the default path.
Unfortunately, embracing the pathless path means accepting that you might not know what you are doing and you might look like a fool. This is exactly how I felt in those first few months. But luckily many people have gone before me. I was guided by people like Morrie and Mitch Albom, and others, like Rebecca Solnit, who showed me that getting lost was simply the understanding that “the world has become larger than your knowledge of it.”177
The pathless path is about opening yourself up to this emergence. It’s about growing up and letting go. It’s about realizing that if I claim to care about something, I need to be willing to act, and also be willing to be wrong. I must let go of my ego and my need to be seen as a “successful” person. I still feel lost in the sense that I don’t know what form my path will take in the future and what publishing this book means for my life. Those thoughts are scary and exciting.
I wouldn’t have it any other way.
My life won’t look exactly like Morrie’s, but I hope that I can channel the spirit of his wisdom. It’s rare to find someone at the end of their life that is still so energized and excited about life. I hope I can make it there in that state too.
But the real question is this – are you coming with me?
Go Find Out
I didn’t write this book to provide you with a set of how‑to instructions for embracing the pathless path. Instead, I want to inspire you to dream a little bit bigger, add some nuance to how you think about life decisions, and give you models and ideas that might enable you to embrace the spirit of the pathless path.
After reading this book, you should no longer be able to look at your current path and think, “this is definitely the only way.” Instead, I hope you are able to shift to a place where you know that you have more freedom than you think, and your path can become something you choose again every day.
We are living in a time when it’s possible for more and more people to design a life in which they can thrive. Yet many look at that possibility and say, “no thanks,” because it means discomfort, uncertainty, and a higher risk of failure. I shared my story because I want to show you that even though you may experience all of those things on the pathless path, the journey can still be worth it.
And it might be the only sensible option left.
We invent the stories we use to guide our lives, and these stories will continue to evolve. Due to many factors, many of our current cultural scripts and stories have calcified over several generations and have stopped working as reliably as they have in the past. This has left large numbers of people around the world confused and frustrated with their relationship to work.
In the first year of leaving my job, everything I thought I knew about the world crumbled as though it had always been an obvious illusion. This was hard to deal with, but I had a lot of support from my friends Stephen Warley and Nita Baum, who had been on their own pathless paths for many years. I often asked them, “Is everyone blind to this, or am I the crazy one?” The answer, I realized, was a bit of both. You must be a little crazy to go against the grain of what most people think. Yet we should remind ourselves that these “experiments in living” as John Stuart Mill called them, are vital to pushing culture forward.
During the Covid‑19 pandemic, many people around the world were forced to work remotely. Suddenly what I had been writing about for years became poignant for many people. Sitting at home, knocked out of their daily rhythms, people confessed to me that they were shocked at how much of their identity was wrapped up in work and how lost they had become in their own lives. They wanted to find a new way forward.
This book is my proposal for a new way forward.
Which means things are in your hands now.  To help you on your journey, I’ve put together a list of ten things.  This is both a summary of many of the lessons from this book as well as a challenge for you as you embrace the spirit of the pathless path.
First, question the default. For many years, I stuck with a story about how I thought my life should go. I assumed there was only one option for structuring my life, around full-time work. I tried to be a “good egg” but ultimately, found myself unhappy with the direction my life was headed. I stumbled into a pathless path and slowly realized that a rigid version of the default path that existed in my mind was only one option of many.
Second, reflect. When I started reflecting on my true self, I was able to start building a life around the things I valued. Most of us run on autopilot through life but we can break out of this mode by considering even the simplest reflection exercises. For me creating a daily reminder of four priorities that mattered to me and revisiting the leadership principles I aspired to in grad school helped me see that the gap between what I claimed to care about and how I was living was larger than I wanted. Through reflection, I was able to see that there was a larger “conversation” I was meant to have with the world.
Third, figure out what you have to offer. In our desire to be successful, we forget to notice how we are having an impact on others. One of the easiest ways to begin this exploration is to send a message to a few close friends, asking them, “when have you seen me at my best self?” Their responses may surprise you and, perhaps, delight you. We all have stories about who we think we are and why we must be that way but often, others have a better perspective on what makes us stand out.
Fourth, pause and disconnect. To improve your relationship with work, I believe it is necessary to disconnect. Unfortunately, a typical one or two-week vacation isn’t going to cut it. I believe that the minimum effective dose is at least a month away from work. While this may seem impossible or terrifying, this intervention has a near-universal approval rating and can have a profound effect on your confidence about the future. If a month is scary, I suggest blocking off a random Tuesday afternoon, or another day in the workweek. Don’t tell anyone what you are doing and go wander. Go for a long walk, a bike ride, or sit by a river. Pay attention to the feelings that come up and see what they are telling you.
Fifth, go make a friend. Venture out of your existing bubble and reach out to someone who has taken an interesting path. Ask them how they got started, what motivates them, and how they think about navigating their life. Most people are much more enthusiastic about sharing what they’ve learned in their lives than we expect. To embrace the pathless path, you need friends and all you need at the start is one person. Over time, designing your work in a way that will help you naturally “find the others,” can be one of the most rewarding things of being on the pathless path and one of the most valuable things you can do in life.
Sixth, go make something. Remember, you are creative! Almost everyone has a desire to create something and to put their energy into the world in a positive way. It’s just that the legacy of the default path has convinced people that they need permission. But you know this is not true anymore. Find a way to create. Host a dinner party, organize a volunteer event, write a blog post, start journaling in the morning, paint a picture, or host a cooking class for your friends. It doesn’t matter what you do, but the sooner you figure out a way to create and share with the world, the faster you’ll be able to move closer to finding the activities you want to continue doing throughout your life.
Seventh, give generously. Generosity is not only an amount of money, it is a skill we need to practice. It is a way of orienting towards the world that will help you start to understand your own definition of “enough,” grapple with your hidden money scripts, and enable you to decouple your belief that security and money are perfectly linked.  You don’t need to embrace the gift economy completely.  Instead, you just need to pay attention and start making offers to share or give when the opportunity emerges.  If you don’t have an idea, I’ll give you an easy way out: you can gift this book to someone that might enjoy it.  Ultimately giving is a superpower on the pathless path and will enable you to transcend feelings of separateness and connect more deeply to the people around you.
Eighth, experiment. The default path does not leave much space for experimenting with different ways of structuring your life. On the pathless path, you can prototype a change, work in different ways, take extended breaks, live in different countries, test your money beliefs, embrace unique fixed-point goals, and create things you never thought were possible.  Remember, the goal is not to get rich but always to figure out what to do next.
Ninth, commit. Many people falsely think that escaping work is something worth aiming towards. I thought this at first but realized I had only thought about work as the things you do within a job. What I really wanted was the opportunity to feel useful and to do things that challenged me to grow. This is why I believe that the “real work of your life” is searching for the things you want to commit to and that make your life meaningful.  Once you find them, you can dedicate your time to creating the environment to make those things happen.
Finally, be patient. In a famous letter to his friend Hume, Hunter S. Thompson argued that searching for the right path in life was important, even if it required many attempts. He told Hume that if he tried eight different paths and failed, that he must keep searching: “you must find a ninth path.”178 Embracing the pathless path can be a slow and frustrating journey, one that happens at a different speed for everyone. It took me years to build up the courage to quit my job and then several more years to find a mix of work, people, and a way of orienting in the world that felt like it was a path I was meant to be on. Don’t rush things.  Remember: nothing good gets away, as long as you create the space to let it emerge.
The only thing left to do?  Go and see what might happen if you dare to seek out, as the Poet Mary Oliver has called your “one wild and precious life.”179
I hope you do because I’m always looking for more friends to join me along the way.

Acknowledgements
Writing this book has been a good opportunity to reflect on my life. One of the things that is clear out is how lucky I’ve been. I’ve been surrounded by so many good influences that it seems a bit unfair.
I owe the biggest thanks to my parents, Nancy and Bob, for giving me a childhood where I was loved and encouraged. This enabled me to become a confident adult, find success on the default path, and eventually have the courage to carve my own. In addition, I need to thank almost everyone in my extended family. I grew up surrounded by loving siblings, aunts, uncles, grandparents, and cousins, on both sides of my family, all of which have made silent appearances in this book through their inspiration on my life.
Next, I want to thank my wife, Angie. She’s been my biggest supporter since we’ve met. While she’s not literally in every chapter of this book, her spirit flows throughout the entire thing. When I told her about the “pathless path” idea from David Whyte’s book early on in our relationship she loved it too. When we got married she created a journal for us with the words “The Pathless Path” on the cover as something we could use to reflect on our travels and life. She hates taking credit for anything but meeting her was a big impetus for me being able to shift away from a state of scarcity, wanting to escape life and work, and towards one where I wanted to commit more deeply to building an online business, writing, and owning my own unique path (with her, of course).
I’ve been lucky to have had many great mentors in school and at work. In college, Dr. Lease‑Butts was one of the first, challenging me to do things that were hard. Even though I took her classes as part of my “hoop-jumping” attempts to get “easy A’s,” I probably learned more about my potential in those classes than any others. In consulting, I was lucky to have several great managers. Christine, Omeed, Peter, and Yvonne were managers that treated me as a person first, worker second, while still pushing me to grow.
After quitting my job, I somehow attracted a small group of enthusiastic supporters. Aunt Debbie, Noel, Cam, Jordan, and Jeremy all had an absurd level of belief in my ability to figure things out and always encouraged me to “keep going.” Nita, Stephen, and Jonny were my greatest friends and co-conspirators who were deeply on their own pathless paths. I’m grateful for their wisdom, friendship, and companionship. I’m also especially thankful that Jonny handed me that David Whyte book in the summer of 2018. It changed my life and led to this book.
Along the way, I’ve been inspired by many people on their own pathless paths, and have learned many things from fellow pathless path participants like Andrew, Michael, Kyle, Tom, Robbie, Jacqueline, Venkatesh, Lydia, Khe, Oshan, Jay, Erv, Matthew, Darren, Travis, Howard, Nemo, Janet, Damien, and Kris not to mention many others.  I also want to thank Amy McMillen for writing about her own experiences after leaving her job in Reclaiming Control.  The existence of her book convinced me that I needed to share my own journey too.
When I started this book, I thought I was a decent writer. Thirteen months later, I now sense I’m still just getting started. John Adamus, Ranjit Saimbi, Paula Trucks-Pape, and Sasha Chapin all helped improve my writing in substantially different but equally powerful ways. In addition, I’d love to thank Thomas Hollands, Stephen Laskowski, Valerie Zhang, Maria Mercedes Otero, Oshan Jarow, and Antoine Buteau for reading various drafts of my book and encouraging me to keep going every step of the way.  Finally, thank you to Jon, Lauren, Zakk, and Sadie for offering great vibes and hospitality during the final intensive week of editing at Creator Cabins.

Introduction
My Story
ON THE FINAL
day of my sophomore year of high school, I was hit in the face with a baseball bat. As my classmate took a full swing, the bat slipped out of his hands and came flying toward me before striking me directly between the eyes. I have no memory of the moment of impact.
The bat smashed into my face with such force that it crushed my nose into a distorted U-shape. The collision sent the soft tissue of my brain slamming into the inside of my skull. Immediately, a wave of swelling surged throughout my head. In a fraction of a second, I had a broken nose, multiple skull fractures, and two shattered eye sockets.
When I opened my eyes, I saw people staring at me and running over to help. I looked down and noticed spots of red on my clothes. One of my classmates took the shirt off his back and handed it to me. I used it to plug the stream of blood rushing from my broken nose. Shocked and confused, I was unaware of how seriously I had been injured.
My teacher looped his arm around my shoulder and we began the long walk to the nurse’s office: across the field, down the hill, and back
into school. Random hands touched my sides, holding me upright. We took our time and walked slowly. Nobody realized that every minute mattered.
When we arrived at the nurse’s office, she asked me a series of questions.
“What year is it?”
“1998,” I answered. It was actually 2002.
“Who is the president of the United States?”
“Bill Clinton,” I said. The correct answer was George W. Bush.
“What is your mom’s name?”
“Uh. Um.” I stalled. Ten seconds passed.
“Patti,” I said casually, ignoring the fact that it had taken me ten seconds to remember my own mother’s name.
That is the last question I remember. My body was unable to handle the rapid swelling in my brain and I lost consciousness before the ambulance arrived. Minutes later, I was carried out of school and taken to the local hospital.
Shortly after arriving, my body began shutting down. I struggled with basic functions like swallowing and breathing. I had my first seizure of the day. Then I stopped breathing entirely. As the doctors hurried to supply me with oxygen, they also decided the local hospital was unequipped to handle the situation and ordered a helicopter to fly me to a larger hospital in Cincinnati.
I was rolled out of the emergency room doors and toward the helipad across the street. The stretcher rattled on a bumpy sidewalk as one nurse pushed me along while another pumped each breath into me by hand. My mother, who had arrived at the hospital a few moments before, climbed into the helicopter beside me. I remained unconscious and unable to breathe on my own as she held my hand during the flight.
While my mother rode with me in the helicopter, my father went home to check on my brother and sister and break the news to them. He choked back tears as he explained to my sister that he would miss her eighth-grade graduation ceremony that night. After passing my siblings off to family and friends, he drove to Cincinnati to meet my mother.
When my mom and I landed on the roof of the hospital, a team of nearly twenty doctors and nurses sprinted onto the helipad and wheeled me into the trauma unit. By this time, the swelling in my brain had become so severe that I was having repeated post-traumatic seizures. My broken bones needed to be fixed, but I was in no condition to undergo surgery. After yet another seizure—my third of the day—I was put into a medically induced coma and placed on a ventilator.
My parents were no strangers to this hospital. Ten years earlier, they had entered the same building on the ground floor after my sister was diagnosed with leukemia at age three. I was five at the time. My brother was just six months old. After two and a half years of chemotherapy treatments, spinal taps, and bone marrow biopsies, my little sister finally walked out of the hospital happy, healthy, and cancer free. And now, after ten years of normal life, my parents found themselves back in the same place with a different child.
While I slipped into a coma, the hospital sent a priest and a social worker to comfort my parents. It was the same priest who had met with them a decade earlier on the evening they found out my sister had cancer.
As day faded into night, a series of machines kept me alive. My parents slept restlessly on a hospital mattress—one moment they would collapse from fatigue, the next they would be wide awake with worry. My mother would tell me later, “It was one of the worst nights I’ve ever had.”
MY RECOVERY
Mercifully, by the next morning my breathing had rebounded to the point where the doctors felt comfortable releasing me from the coma. When I finally regained consciousness, I discovered that I had lost my ability to smell. As a test, a nurse asked me to blow my nose and sniff an apple juice box. My sense of smell returned, but—to everyone’s surprise—the act of blowing my nose forced air through the fractures in my eye socket and pushed my left eye outward. My eyeball bulged out of the socket, held precariously in place by my eyelid and the optic nerve attaching my eye to my brain.
The ophthalmologist said my eye would gradually slide back into place as the air seeped out, but it was hard to tell how long this would take. I was scheduled for surgery one week later, which would allow me some additional time to heal. I looked like I had been on the wrong end of a boxing match, but I was cleared to leave the hospital. I returned home with a broken nose, half a dozen facial fractures, and a bulging left eye.
The following months were hard. It felt like everything in my life was on pause. I had double vision for weeks; I literally couldn’t see straight. It took more than a month, but my eyeball did eventually return to its normal location. Between the seizures and my vision problems, it was eight months before I could drive a car again. At physical therapy, I practiced basic motor patterns like walking in a straight line. I was determined not to let my injury get me down, but there were more than a few moments when I felt depressed and overwhelmed.
I became painfully aware of how far I had to go when I returned to the baseball field one year later. Baseball had always been a major part of my life. My dad had played minor league baseball for the St. Louis Cardinals, and I had a dream of playing professionally, too. After
months of rehabilitation, what I wanted more than anything was to get back on the field.
But my return to baseball was not smooth. When the season rolled around, I was the only junior to be cut from the varsity baseball team. I was sent down to play with the sophomores on junior varsity. I had been playing since age four, and for someone who had spent so much time and effort on the sport, getting cut was humiliating. I vividly remember the day it happened. I sat in my car and cried as I flipped through the radio, desperately searching for a song that would make me feel better.
After a year of self-doubt, I managed to make the varsity team as a senior, but I rarely made it on the field. In total, I played eleven innings of high school varsity baseball, barely more than a single game.
Despite my lackluster high school career, I still believed I could become a great player. And I knew that if things were going to improve, I was the one responsible for making it happen. The turning point came two years after my injury, when I began college at Denison University. It was a new beginning, and it was the place where I would discover the surprising power of small habits for the first time.
HOW I LEARNED ABOUT HABITS
Attending Denison was one of the best decisions of my life. I earned a spot on the baseball team and, although I was at the bottom of the roster as a freshman, I was thrilled. Despite the chaos of my high school years, I had managed to become a college athlete.
I wasn’t going to be starting on the baseball team anytime soon, so I focused on getting my life in order. While my peers stayed up late and played video games, I built good sleep habits and went to bed early each night. In the messy world of a college dorm, I made a point to
keep my room neat and tidy. These improvements were minor, but they gave me a sense of control over my life. I started to feel confident again. And this growing belief in myself rippled into the classroom as I improved my study habits and managed to earn straight A’s during my first year.
A habit is a routine or behavior that is performed regularly—and, in many cases, automatically. As each semester passed, I accumulated small but consistent habits that ultimately led to results that were unimaginable to me when I started. For example, for the first time in my life, I made it a habit to lift weights multiple times per week, and in the years that followed, my six-foot-four-inch frame bulked up from a featherweight 170 to a lean 200 pounds.
When my sophomore season arrived, I earned a starting role on the pitching staff. By my junior year, I was voted team captain and at the end of the season, I was selected for the all-conference team. But it was not until my senior season that my sleep habits, study habits, and strength-training habits really began to pay off.
Six years after I had been hit in the face with a baseball bat, flown to the hospital, and placed into a coma, I was selected as the top male athlete at Denison University and named to the ESPN Academic All-America Team—an honor given to just thirty-three players across the country. By the time I graduated, I was listed in the school record books in eight different categories. That same year, I was awarded the university’s highest academic honor, the President’s Medal.
I hope you’ll forgive me if this sounds boastful. To be honest, there was nothing legendary or historic about my athletic career. I never ended up playing professionally. However, looking back on those years, I believe I accomplished something just as rare: I fulfilled my potential. And I believe the concepts in this book can help you fulfill your potential as well.
We all face challenges in life. This injury was one of mine, and the
experience taught me a critical lesson: changes that seem small and unimportant at first will compound into remarkable results if you’re willing to stick with them for years.
We all deal with setbacks but in the long run, the quality of our lives often depends on the quality of our habits. With the same habits, you’ll end up with the same results. But with better habits, anything is possible.
Maybe there are people who can achieve incredible success overnight. I don’t know any of them, and I’m certainly not one of them. There wasn’t one defining moment on my journey from medically induced coma to Academic All-American; there were many. It was a gradual evolution, a long series of small wins and tiny breakthroughs. The only way I made progress—the only choice I had—was to start small. And I employed this same strategy a few years later when I started my own business and began working on this book.
HOW AND WHY I WROTE THIS BOOK
In November 2012, I began publishing articles at jamesclear.com. For years, I had been keeping notes about my personal experiments with habits and I was finally ready to share some of them publicly. I began by publishing a new article every Monday and Thursday. Within a few months, this simple writing habit led to my first one thousand email subscribers, and by the end of 2013 that number had grown to more than thirty thousand people.
In 2014, my email list expanded to over one hundred thousand subscribers, which made it one of the fastest-growing newsletters on the internet. I had felt like an impostor when I began writing two years earlier, but now I was becoming known as an expert on habits—a new label that excited me but also felt uncomfortable. I had never considered myself a master of the topic, but rather someone who was experimenting alongside my readers.
In 2015, I reached two hundred thousand email subscribers and signed a book deal with Penguin Random House to begin writing the book you are reading now. As my audience grew, so did my business opportunities. I was increasingly asked to speak at top companies about the science of habit formation, behavior change, and continuous improvement. I found myself delivering keynote speeches at conferences in the United States and Europe.
In 2016, my articles began to appear regularly in major publications like Time
, Entrepreneur
, and Forbes
. Incredibly, my writing was read by over eight million people that year. Coaches in the NFL, NBA, and MLB began reading my work and sharing it with their teams.
At the start of 2017, I launched the Habits Academy, which became the premier training platform for organizations and individuals interested in building better habits in life and work.
*
Fortune 500 companies and growing start-ups began to enroll their leaders and train their staff. In total, over ten thousand leaders, managers, coaches, and teachers have graduated from the Habits Academy, and my work with them has taught me an incredible amount about what it takes to make habits work in the real world.
As I put the finishing touches on this book in 2018, jamesclear.com is receiving millions of visitors per month and nearly five hundred thousand people subscribe to my weekly email newsletter—a number that is so far beyond my expectations when I began that I’m not even sure what to think of it.
HOW THIS BOOK WILL BENEFIT YOU
The entrepreneur and investor Naval Ravikant has said, “To write a great book, you must first become the book.” I originally learned about
the ideas mentioned here because I had to live them. I had to rely on small habits to rebound from my injury, to get stronger in the gym, to perform at a high level on the field, to become a writer, to build a successful business, and simply to develop into a responsible adult. Small habits helped me fulfill my potential, and since you picked up this book, I’m guessing you’d like to fulfill yours as well.
In the pages that follow, I will share a step-by-step plan for building better habits—not for days or weeks, but for a lifetime. While science supports everything I’ve written, this book is not an academic research paper; it’s an operating manual. You’ll find wisdom and practical advice front and center as I explain the science of how to create and change your habits in a way that is easy to understand and apply.
The fields I draw on—biology, neuroscience, philosophy, psychology, and more—have been around for many years. What I offer you is a synthesis of the best ideas smart people figured out a long time ago as well as the most compelling discoveries scientists have made recently. My contribution, I hope, is to find the ideas that matter most and connect them in a way that is highly actionable. Anything wise in these pages you should credit to the many experts who preceded me. Anything foolish, assume it is my error.
The backbone of this book is my four-step model of habits—cue, craving, response, and reward—and the four laws of behavior change that evolve out of these steps. Readers with a psychology background may recognize some of these terms from operant conditioning, which was first proposed as “
stimulus, response, reward” by B. F. Skinner in the 1930s and has been popularized more recently as “
cue, routine, reward” in The Power of Habit
by Charles Duhigg.
Behavioral scientists like Skinner realized that if you offered the right reward or punishment, you could get people to act in a certain way. But while Skinner’s model did an excellent job of explaining how external stimuli influenced our habits, it lacked a good explanation
for how our thoughts, feelings, and beliefs impact our behavior. Internal states—our moods and emotions—matter, too. In recent decades, scientists have begun to determine the connection between our thoughts, feelings, and behavior. This research will also be covered in these pages.
In total, the framework I offer is an integrated model of the cognitive and behavioral sciences. I believe it is one of the first models of human behavior to accurately account for both the influence of external stimuli and internal emotions on our habits. While some of the language may be familiar, I am confident that the details—and the applications of the Four Laws of Behavior Change—will offer a new way to think about your habits.
Human behavior is always changing: situation to situation, moment to moment, second to second. But this book is about what doesn’t
change. It’s about the fundamentals of human behavior. The lasting principles you can rely on year after year. The ideas you can build a business around, build a family around, build a life around.
There is no one right way to create better habits, but this book describes the best way I know—an approach that will be effective regardless of where you start or what you’re trying to change. The strategies I cover will be relevant to anyone looking for a step-by-step system for improvement, whether your goals center on health, money, productivity, relationships, or all of the above. As long as human behavior is involved, this book will be your guide.

THE
FUNDAMENTALS
Why Tiny Changes Make a Big
Difference

1
The Surprising Power of Atomic Habits
THE FATE
OF
British Cycling changed one day in 2003. The organization, which was the governing body for professional cycling in Great Britain, had recently hired Dave Brailsford as its new performance director. At the time, professional cyclists in Great Britain had endured nearly one hundred years of mediocrity. Since 1908, British riders had won
just a single gold medal at the Olympic Games, and they had fared even worse in cycling’s biggest race,
the Tour de France. In 110 years, no British cyclist had ever won the event.
In fact, the performance of British riders had been so underwhelming that
one of the top bike manufacturers in Europe refused to sell bikes to the team because they were afraid that it would hurt sales if other professionals saw the Brits using their gear.
Brailsford had been hired to put British Cycling on a new trajectory. What made him different from previous coaches was his relentless commitment to a strategy that he referred to as “the aggregation of marginal gains,” which was the philosophy of searching for a tiny margin of improvement in everything you do. Brailsford said, “
The whole principle came from the idea that if you broke down everything you
could think of that goes into riding a bike, and then improve it by 1 percent, you will get a significant increase when you put them all together.”
Brailsford and his coaches began by making small adjustments you might expect from a professional cycling team. They redesigned the bike seats to make them more comfortable and rubbed alcohol on the tires for a better grip. They asked riders to wear electrically heated overshorts to maintain ideal muscle temperature while riding and used biofeedback sensors to monitor how each athlete responded to a particular workout. The team tested various fabrics in a wind tunnel and had their outdoor riders switch to indoor racing suits, which proved to be lighter and more aerodynamic.
But they didn’t stop there. Brailsford and his team continued to find 1 percent improvements in overlooked and unexpected areas. They tested different types of massage gels to see which one led to the fastest muscle recovery. They hired a surgeon to teach each rider the best way to wash their hands to reduce the chances of catching a cold. They determined the type of pillow and mattress that led to the best night’s sleep for each rider.
They even painted the inside of the team truck white, which helped them spot little bits of dust that would normally slip by unnoticed but could degrade the performance of the finely tuned bikes.
As these and hundreds of other small improvements accumulated, the results came faster than anyone could have imagined.
Just five years after Brailsford took over, the British Cycling team dominated the road and track cycling events at the 2008 Olympic Games in Beijing, where they won an astounding 60 percent of the gold medals available. Four years later, when the Olympic Games came to London,
the Brits raised the bar as they set nine Olympic records and seven world records.
That same year,
Bradley Wiggins became the first British cyclist to win the Tour de France. The next year, his teammate
Chris Froome won the race, and he would go on to win again in 2015, 2016, and 2017, giving the British team five Tour de France victories in six years.
During the ten-year span from 2007 to 2017, British cyclists won 178 world championships and sixty-six Olympic or Paralympic gold medals and captured five Tour de France victories in what is widely regarded as the most successful run in cycling history.
*
How does this happen? How does a team of previously ordinary athletes transform into world champions with tiny changes that, at first glance, would seem to make a modest difference at best? Why do small improvements accumulate into such remarkable results, and how can you replicate this approach in your own life?
WHY SMALL HABITS MAKE A BIG DIFFERENCE
It is so easy to overestimate the importance of one defining moment and underestimate the value of making small improvements on a daily basis. Too often, we convince ourselves that massive success requires massive action. Whether it is losing weight, building a business, writing a book, winning a championship, or achieving any other goal, we put pressure on ourselves to make some earth-shattering improvement that everyone will talk about.
Meanwhile, improving by 1 percent isn’t particularly notable—sometimes it isn’t even noticeable
—but it can be far more meaningful, especially in the long run. The difference a tiny improvement can make over time is astounding. Here’s how the math works out: if you can get 1 percent better each day for one year,
you’ll end up thirty-seven times better by the time you’re done. Conversely, if you get 1 percent worse each day for one year, you’ll decline nearly down to zero. What starts as a small win or a minor setback accumulates into something much more.
1% BETTER EVERY DAY
1% worse every day for one year. 0.99365
= 00.03
1% better every day for one year. 1.01365
= 37.78
FIGURE 1:
The effects of small habits compound over time. For example, if you can get just 1 percent better each day, you’ll end up with results that are nearly 37 times better after one year.
Habits are the compound interest of self-improvement. The same way that money multiplies through compound interest, the effects of your habits multiply as you repeat them. They seem to make little difference on any given day and yet the impact they deliver over the months and years can be enormous. It is only when looking back two, five, or perhaps ten years later that the value of good habits and the cost of bad ones becomes strikingly apparent.
This can be a difficult concept to appreciate in daily life. We often
dismiss small changes because they don’t seem to matter very much in the moment. If you save a little money now, you’re still not a millionaire. If you go to the gym three days in a row, you’re still out of shape. If you study Mandarin for an hour tonight, you still haven’t learned the language. We make a few changes, but the results never seem to come quickly and so we slide back into our previous routines.
Unfortunately, the slow pace of transformation also makes it easy to let a bad habit slide. If you eat an unhealthy meal today, the scale doesn’t move much. If you work late tonight and ignore your family, they will forgive you. If you procrastinate and put your project off until tomorrow, there will usually be time to finish it later. A single decision is easy to dismiss.
But when we repeat 1 percent errors, day after day, by replicating poor decisions, duplicating tiny mistakes, and rationalizing little excuses, our small choices compound into toxic results. It’s the accumulation of many missteps—a 1 percent decline here and there—that eventually leads to a problem.
The impact created by a change in your habits is similar to the effect of shifting the route of an airplane by just a few degrees. Imagine you are flying from Los Angeles to New York City. If a pilot leaving from LAX adjusts the heading just 3.5 degrees south, you will land in Washington, D.C., instead of New York. Such a small change is barely noticeable at takeoff—the nose of the airplane moves just a few feet—but when magnified across the entire United States, you end up hundreds of miles apart.
*
Similarly, a slight change in your daily habits can guide your life to a very different destination. Making a choice that is 1 percent better or 1 percent worse seems insignificant in the moment, but over the span
of moments that make up a lifetime these choices determine the difference between who you are and who you could be. Success is the product of daily habits—not once-in-a-lifetime transformations.
That said, it doesn’t matter how successful or unsuccessful you are right now. What matters is whether your habits are putting you on the path toward success. You should be far more concerned with your current trajectory than with your current results. If you’re a millionaire but you spend more than you earn each month, then you’re on a bad trajectory. If your spending habits don’t change, it’s not going to end well. Conversely, if you’re broke, but you save a little bit every month, then you’re on the path toward financial freedom—even if you’re moving slower than you’d like.
Your outcomes are a lagging measure of your habits. Your net worth is a lagging measure of your financial habits. Your weight is a lagging measure of your eating habits. Your knowledge is a lagging measure of your learning habits. Your clutter is a lagging measure of your cleaning habits. You get what you repeat.
If you want to predict where you’ll end up in life, all you have to do is follow the curve of tiny gains or tiny losses, and see how your daily choices will compound ten or twenty years down the line. Are you spending less than you earn each month? Are you making it into the gym each week? Are you reading books and learning something new each day? Tiny battles like these are the ones that will define your future self.
Time magnifies the margin between success and failure. It will multiply whatever you feed it. Good habits make time your ally. Bad habits make time your enemy.
Habits are a double-edged sword. Bad habits can cut you down just as easily as good habits can build you up, which is why understanding the details is crucial. You need to know how habits work and how to design them to your liking, so you can avoid the dangerous half of the blade.
YOUR HABITS CAN COMPOUND FOR YOU OR AGAINST YOU
Positive Compounding
Productivity compounds.
Accomplishing one extra task is a small feat on any given day, but it counts for a lot over an entire career. The effect of automating an old task or mastering a new skill can be even greater.
The more tasks you can handle without thinking, the more your brain is free to focus on other areas.
Knowledge compounds.
Learning one new idea won’t make you a genius, but a commitment to lifelong learning can be transformative. Furthermore,
each book you read not only teaches you something new but also opens up different ways of thinking about old ideas. As Warren Buffett says, “That’s how knowledge works. It builds up, like compound interest.”
Relationships compound.
People reflect your behavior back to you. The more you help others, the more others want to help you. Being a little bit nicer in each interaction can result in a network of broad and strong connections over time.
Negative Compounding
Stress compounds.
The frustration of a traffic jam. The weight of parenting responsibilities. The worry of making ends meet. The strain of slightly high blood pressure. By themselves, these common causes of stress are manageable. But when they persist for years, little stresses compound into serious health issues.
Negative thoughts compound.
The more you think of yourself as worthless, stupid, or ugly, the more you condition yourself to interpret life that way. You get trapped in a thought loop. The same is true for how you think about others. Once you fall into the habit of seeing people as angry, unjust, or selfish, you see those kind of people everywhere.
Outrage compounds.
Riots, protests, and mass movements are rarely the result of a single event. Instead, a long series of microaggressions and daily aggravations slowly multiply until one event tips the scales and outrage spreads like wildfire.
WHAT PROGRESS IS REALLY LIKE
Imagine that you have an ice cube sitting on the table in front of you. The room is cold and you can see your breath. It is currently twenty-five degrees. Ever so slowly, the room begins to heat up.
Twenty-six degrees.
Twenty-seven.
Twenty-eight.
The ice cube is still sitting on the table in front of you.
Twenty-nine degrees.
Thirty.
Thirty-one.
Still, nothing has happened.
Then, thirty-two degrees. The ice begins to melt. A one-degree shift, seemingly no different from the temperature increases before it, has unlocked a huge change.
Breakthrough moments are often the result of many previous actions, which build up the potential required to unleash a major change. This pattern shows up everywhere.
Cancer spends 80 percent of its life undetectable, then takes over the body in months. Bamboo can barely be seen for the first five years as it builds extensive root systems underground before exploding ninety feet into the air within six weeks.
Similarly, habits often appear to make no difference until you cross a critical threshold and unlock a new level of performance. In the early and middle stages of any quest, there is often a Valley of Disappointment. You expect to make progress in a linear fashion and it’s frustrating how ineffective changes can seem during the first days, weeks, and even months. It doesn’t feel like you are going anywhere. It’s a hallmark of any compounding process: the most powerful outcomes are delayed.
This is one of the core reasons why it is so hard to build habits that
last. People make a few small changes, fail to see a tangible result, and decide to stop. You think, “I’ve been running every day for a month, so why can’t I see any change in my body?” Once this kind of thinking takes over, it’s easy to let good habits fall by the wayside. But in order to make a meaningful difference, habits need to persist long enough to break through this plateau—what I call the Plateau of Latent Potential
.
If you find yourself struggling to build a good habit or break a bad one, it is not because you have lost your ability to improve. It is often because you have not yet crossed the Plateau of Latent Potential. Complaining about not achieving success despite working hard is like complaining about an ice cube not melting when you heated it from twenty-five to thirty-one degrees. Your work was not wasted; it is just being stored. All the action happens at thirty-two degrees.
When you finally break through the Plateau of Latent Potential, people will call it an overnight success. The outside world only sees the most dramatic event rather than all that preceded it. But you know that it’s the work you did long ago—when it seemed that you weren’t making any progress—that makes the jump today possible.
It is the human equivalent of geological pressure. Two tectonic plates can grind against one another for millions of years, the tension slowly building all the while. Then, one day, they rub each other once again, in the same fashion they have for ages, but this time the tension is too great. An earthquake erupts. Change can take years—before it happens all at once.
Mastery requires patience.
The San Antonio Spurs, one of the most successful teams in NBA history, have a quote from social reformer Jacob Riis hanging in their locker room: “When nothing seems to help, I go and look at a stonecutter hammering away at his rock, perhaps a hundred times without as much as a crack showing in it. Yet at the hundred and first blow it will split in two, and I know it was not that last blow that did it—but all that had gone before.”
THE PLATEAU OF LATENT POTENTIAL
FIGURE 2:
We often expect progress to be linear. At the very least, we hope it will come quickly. In reality, the results of our efforts are often delayed. It is not until months or years later that we realize the true value of the previous work we have done. This can result in a “valley of disappointment” where people feel discouraged after putting in weeks or months of hard work without experiencing any results. However, this work was not wasted. It was simply being stored. It is not until much later that the full value of previous efforts is revealed.
All big things come from small beginnings.
The seed of every habit is a single, tiny decision. But as that decision is repeated, a habit sprouts and grows stronger. Roots entrench themselves and branches grow. The task of breaking a bad habit is like uprooting a powerful oak within
us. And the task of building a good habit is like cultivating a delicate flower one day at a time.
But what determines whether we stick with a habit long enough to survive the Plateau of Latent Potential and break through to the other side? What is it that causes some people to slide into unwanted habits and enables others to enjoy the compounding effects of good ones?
FORGET ABOUT GOALS, FOCUS ON SYSTEMS INSTEAD
Prevailing wisdom claims that the best way to achieve what we want in life—getting into better shape, building a successful business, relaxing more and worrying less, spending more time with friends and family—is to set specific, actionable goals.
For many years, this was how I approached my habits, too. Each one was a goal to be reached. I set goals for the grades I wanted to get in school, for the weights I wanted to lift in the gym, for the profits I wanted to earn in business. I succeeded at a few, but I failed at a lot of them. Eventually, I began to realize that my results had very little to do with the goals I set and nearly everything to do with the systems I followed.
What’s the difference between systems and goals? It’s a distinction I first learned from Scott Adams, the cartoonist behind the Dilbert
comic. Goals are about the results you want to achieve. Systems are about the processes that lead to those results.
If you’re a coach, your goal might be to win a championship. Your system is the way you recruit players, manage your assistant coaches, and conduct practice.
If you’re an entrepreneur, your goal might be to build a million-dollar business. Your system is how you test product ideas, hire employees, and run marketing campaigns.
If you’re a musician, your goal might be to play a new piece. Your system is how often you practice, how you break down and tackle difficult measures, and your method for receiving feedback from your instructor.
Now for the interesting question: If you completely ignored your goals and focused only on your system, would you still succeed? For example, if you were a basketball coach and you ignored your goal to win a championship and focused only on what your team does at practice each day, would you still get results?
I think you would.
The goal in any sport is to finish with the best score, but it would be ridiculous to spend the whole game staring at the scoreboard. The only way to actually win is to get better each day. In the words of three-time Super Bowl winner Bill Walsh, “The score takes care of itself.” The same is true for other areas of life. If you want better results, then forget about setting goals. Focus on your system instead.
What do I mean by this? Are goals completely useless? Of course not. Goals are good for setting a direction, but systems are best for making progress. A handful of problems arise when you spend too much time thinking about your goals and not enough time designing your systems.
Problem #1: Winners and losers have the same goals.
Goal setting suffers from a serious case of survivorship bias. We concentrate on the people who end up winning—the survivors—and
mistakenly assume that ambitious goals led to their success while overlooking all of the people who had the same objective but didn’t succeed.
Every Olympian wants to win a gold medal. Every candidate wants to get the job. And if successful and unsuccessful people share the same goals, then
the goal cannot be what differentiates the winners from the losers. It wasn’t the goal
of winning the Tour de France that propelled the British cyclists to the top of the sport. Presumably, they had wanted to win the race every year before—just like every other professional team. The goal had always been there. It was only when they implemented a system
of continuous small improvements that they achieved a different outcome.
Problem #2: Achieving a goal is only a momentary change.
Imagine you have a messy room and you set a goal to clean it. If you summon the energy to tidy up, then you will have a clean room—for now. But if you maintain the same sloppy, pack-rat habits that led to a messy room in the first place, soon you’ll be looking at a new pile of clutter and hoping for another burst of motivation. You’re left chasing the same outcome because you never changed the system behind it. You treated a symptom without addressing the cause.
Achieving a goal only changes your life for the moment
. That’s the counterintuitive thing about improvement. We think we need to change our results, but the results are not the problem. What we really need to change are the systems that cause those results. When you solve problems at the results level, you only solve them temporarily. In order to improve for good, you need to solve problems at the systems level. Fix the inputs and the outputs will fix themselves.
Problem #3: Goals restrict your happiness.
The implicit assumption behind any goal is this: “Once I reach my goal, then I’ll be happy.” The problem with a goals-first mentality is that you’re continually putting happiness off until the next milestone. I’ve slipped into this trap so many times I’ve lost count. For years, happiness was always something for my future self to enjoy. I promised myself that once I gained twenty pounds of muscle or after my business was featured in the New York Times
, then I could finally relax.
Furthermore, goals create an “either-or” conflict: either you achieve your goal and are successful or you fail and you are a disappointment. You mentally box yourself into a narrow version of happiness. This is misguided. It is unlikely that your actual path through life will match the exact journey you had in mind when you set out. It makes no sense to restrict your satisfaction to one scenario when there are many paths to success.
A systems-first mentality provides the antidote. When you fall in love with the process rather than the product, you don’t have to wait to give yourself permission to be happy. You can be satisfied anytime your system is running. And a system can be successful in many different forms, not just the one you first envision.
Problem #4: Goals are at odds with long-term progress.
Finally, a goal-oriented mind-set can create a “yo-yo” effect. Many runners work hard for months, but as soon as they cross the finish line, they stop training. The race is no longer there to motivate them. When all of your hard work is focused on a particular goal, what is left to push you forward after you achieve it? This is why many people find themselves reverting to their old habits after accomplishing a goal.
The purpose of setting goals is to win the game. The purpose of building systems is to continue playing the game. True long-term thinking is goal-less thinking. It’s not about any single accomplishment. It is about the cycle of endless refinement and continuous improvement. Ultimately, it is your commitment to the process
that will determine your progress
.
A SYSTEM OF ATOMIC HABITS
If you’re having trouble changing your habits, the problem isn’t you. The problem is your system. Bad habits repeat themselves again and again not because you don’t want to change, but because you have the wrong system for change.
You do not rise to the level of your goals.
You fall to the level of your systems.
Focusing on the overall system, rather than a single goal, is one of the core themes of this book. It is also one of the deeper meanings behind the word atomic
. By now, you’ve probably realized that an atomic habit refers to a tiny change, a marginal gain, a 1 percent improvement. But atomic habits are not just any old habits, however small. They are little habits that are part of a larger system. Just as atoms are the building blocks of molecules, atomic habits are the building blocks of remarkable results.
Habits are like the atoms of our lives. Each one is a fundamental unit that contributes to your overall improvement. At first, these tiny routines seem insignificant, but soon they build on each other and fuel bigger wins that multiply to a degree that far outweighs the cost of their initial investment. They are both small and mighty. This is the meaning of the phrase atomic habits
—a regular practice or routine that is not only small and easy to do, but also the source of incredible power; a component of the system of compound growth.
Chapter Summary
Habits are the compound interest of self-improvement. Getting 1 percent better every day counts for a lot in the long-run.
Habits are a double-edged sword. They can work for you or against you, which is why understanding the details is essential.
Small changes often appear to make no difference until you cross a critical threshold. The most powerful outcomes of any compounding process are delayed. You need to be patient.
An atomic habit is a little habit that is part of a larger system. Just as atoms are the building blocks of molecules, atomic habits are the building blocks of remarkable results.
If you want better results, then forget about setting goals. Focus on your system instead.
You do not rise to the level of your goals. You fall to the level of your systems.

2
How Your Habits Shape Your Identity (and Vice Versa)
WHY IS IT
so easy to repeat bad habits and so hard to form good ones? Few things can have a more powerful impact on your life than improving your daily habits. And yet it is likely that this time next year you’ll be doing the same thing rather than something better.
It often feels difficult to keep good habits going for more than a few days, even with sincere effort and the occasional burst of motivation. Habits like exercise, meditation, journaling, and cooking are reasonable for a day or two and then become a hassle.
However, once your habits are established, they seem to stick around forever—especially the unwanted ones. Despite our best intentions, unhealthy habits like eating junk food, watching too much television, procrastinating, and smoking can feel impossible to break.
Changing our habits is challenging for two reasons: (1) we try to change the wrong thing and (2) we try to change our habits in the wrong way. In this chapter, I’ll address the first point. In the chapters that follow, I’ll answer the second.
Our first mistake is that we try to change the wrong thing. To
understand what I mean, consider that there are three levels at which change can occur.
You can imagine them like the layers of an onion.
THREE LAYERS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE
FIGURE 3:
There are three layers of behavior change: a change in your outcomes, a change in your processes, or a change in your identity.
The first layer is changing your outcomes.
This level is concerned with changing your results: losing weight, publishing a book, winning a championship. Most of the goals you set are associated with this level of change.
The second layer is changing your process.
This level is concerned with changing your habits and systems: implementing a new routine at the gym, decluttering your desk for better workflow, developing a meditation practice. Most of the habits you build are associated with this level.
The third and deepest layer is changing your identity.
This level is concerned with changing your beliefs: your worldview, your self-image, your judgments about yourself and others. Most of the beliefs, assumptions, and biases you hold are associated with this level.
Outcomes are about what you get. Processes are about what you do.
Identity is about what you believe. When it comes to building habits that last—when it comes to building a system of 1 percent improvements—the problem is not that one level is “better” or “worse” than another. All levels of change are useful in their own way. The problem is the direction
of change.
Many people begin the process of changing their habits by focusing on what
they want to achieve. This leads us to outcome-based habits. The alternative is to build identity-based habits. With this approach, we start by focusing on who
we wish to become.
OUTCOME-BASED HABITS
IDENTITY-BASED HABITS
FIGURE 4:
With outcome-based habits, the focus is on what you want to achieve. With identity-based habits, the focus is on who you wish to become.
Imagine two people resisting a cigarette. When offered a smoke, the first person says, “No thanks. I’m trying to quit.” It sounds like a reasonable response, but this person still believes they are a smoker who is trying to be something else. They are hoping their behavior will change while carrying around the same beliefs.
The second person declines by saying, “No thanks. I’m not a smoker.” It’s a small difference, but this statement signals a shift in identity. Smoking was part of their former life, not their current one. They no longer identify as someone who smokes.
Most people don’t even consider identity change when they set out to improve. They just think, “I want to be skinny (outcome) and if I stick to this diet, then I’ll be skinny (process).” They set goals and determine the actions they should take to achieve those goals without considering the beliefs that drive their actions. They never shift the way they look at themselves, and they don’t realize that their old identity can sabotage their new plans for change.
Behind every system of actions are a system of beliefs. The system of a democracy is founded on beliefs like freedom, majority rule, and social equality. The system of a dictatorship has a very different set of beliefs like absolute authority and strict obedience. You can imagine many ways to try to get more people to vote in a democracy, but such behavior change would never get off the ground in a dictatorship. That’s not the identity of the system. Voting is a behavior that is impossible under a certain set of beliefs.
A similar pattern exists whether we are discussing individuals, organizations, or societies. There are a set of beliefs and assumptions that shape the system, an identity behind the habits.
Behavior that is incongruent with the self will not last. You may want more money, but if your identity is someone who consumes rather than creates, then you’ll continue to be pulled toward spending rather than earning. You may want better health, but if you continue to
prioritize comfort over accomplishment, you’ll be drawn to relaxing rather than training. It’s hard to change your habits if you never change the underlying beliefs that led to your past behavior. You have a new goal and a new plan, but you haven’t changed who
you are.
The story of Brian Clark, an entrepreneur from Boulder, Colorado, provides a good example. “For as long as I can remember, I’ve chewed my fingernails,” Clark told me. “It started as a nervous habit when I was young, and then morphed into an undesirable grooming ritual. One day,
I resolved to stop chewing my nails until they grew out a bit. Through mindful willpower alone, I managed to do it.”
Then, Clark did something surprising.
“I asked my wife to schedule my first-ever manicure,” he said. “My thought was that if I started paying to maintain my nails, I wouldn’t chew them. And it worked, but not for the monetary reason. What happened was the manicure made my fingers look really nice for the first time. The manicurist even said that—other than the chewing—I had really healthy, attractive nails. Suddenly, I was proud of my fingernails. And even though that’s something I had never aspired to, it made all the difference. I’ve never chewed my nails since; not even a single close call. And it’s because I now take pride in properly caring for them.”
The ultimate form of intrinsic motivation is when a habit becomes part of your identity. It’s one thing to say I’m the type of person who wants
this. It’s something very different to say I’m the type of person who is
this.
The more pride you have in a particular aspect of your identity, the more motivated you will be to maintain the habits associated with it. If you’re proud of how your hair looks, you’ll develop all sorts of habits to care for and maintain it. If you’re proud of the size of your biceps, you’ll make sure you never skip an upper-body workout. If you’re proud of the scarves you knit, you’ll be more likely to spend hours
knitting each week. Once your pride gets involved, you’ll fight tooth and nail to maintain your habits.
True behavior change is identity change. You might start a habit because of motivation, but the only reason you’ll stick with one is that it becomes part of your identity. Anyone can convince themselves to visit the gym or eat healthy once or twice, but if you don’t shift the belief behind the behavior, then it is hard to stick with long-term changes. Improvements are only temporary until they become part of who you are.
The goal is not to read a book, the goal is to become
a reader.
The goal is not to run a marathon, the goal is to become
a runner.
The goal is not to learn an instrument, the goal is to become
a musician.
Your behaviors are usually a reflection of your identity. What you do is an indication of the type of person you believe that you are—either consciously or nonconsciously.
*
Research has shown that once a person believes in a particular aspect of their identity, they are more likely to act in alignment with that belief. For example, people who identified as “being a voter” were more likely to vote than those who simply claimed “voting” was an action they wanted to perform. Similarly, the person who incorporates exercise into their identity doesn’t have to convince themselves to train. Doing the right thing is easy. After all, when your behavior and your identity are fully aligned, you
are no longer pursuing behavior change. You are simply acting like the type of person you already believe yourself to be.
Like all aspects of habit formation, this, too, is a double-edged sword. When working for you, identity change can be a powerful force for self-improvement. When working against you, though, identity change can be a curse. Once you have adopted an identity, it can be easy to let your allegiance to it impact your ability to change. Many people walk through life in a cognitive slumber, blindly following the norms attached to their identity.
“I’m terrible with directions.”
“I’m not a morning person.”
“I’m bad at remembering people’s names.”
“I’m always late.”
“I’m not good with technology.”
“I’m horrible at math.”
. . . and a thousand other variations.
When you have repeated a story to yourself for years, it is easy to slide into these mental grooves and accept them as a fact. In time, you begin to resist certain actions because “that’s not who I am.”
There is internal pressure to maintain your self-image and behave in a way that is consistent with your beliefs. You find whatever way you can to avoid contradicting yourself.
The more deeply a thought or action is tied to your identity, the more difficult it is to change it. It can feel comfortable to believe what your culture believes (group identity) or to do what upholds your self-image (personal identity), even if it’s wrong. The biggest barrier to positive change at any level—individual, team, society—is identity conflict. Good habits can make rational sense, but if they conflict with your identity, you will fail to put them into action.
On any given day, you may struggle with your habits because you’re too busy or too tired or too overwhelmed or hundreds of other reasons. Over the long run, however, the real reason you fail to stick with habits is that your self-image gets in the way. This is why you can’t get too attached to one version of your identity. Progress requires unlearning. Becoming the best version of yourself requires you to continuously edit your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your identity.
This brings us to an important question: If your beliefs and worldview play such an important role in your behavior, where do they come from in the first place? How, exactly, is your identity formed? And how can you emphasize new aspects of your identity that serve you and gradually erase the pieces that hinder you?
THE TWO-STEP PROCESS TO CHANGING YOUR IDENTITY
Your identity emerges out of your habits. You are not born with preset beliefs. Every belief, including those about yourself, is learned and conditioned through experience.
*
More precisely, your habits are how you embody
your identity. When you make your bed each day, you embody the identity of an organized person. When you write each day, you embody the identity of a creative person. When you train each day, you embody the identity of an athletic person.
The more you repeat a behavior, the more you reinforce the identity
associated with that behavior. In fact, the word identity
was originally derived from the Latin words essentitas
, which means being,
and identidem
, which means repeatedly
.
Your identity is literally your “repeated beingness.”
Whatever your identity is right now, you only believe it because you have proof of it. If you go to church every Sunday for twenty years, you have evidence that you are religious. If you study biology for one hour every night, you have evidence that you are studious. If you go to the gym even when it’s snowing, you have evidence that you are committed to fitness. The more evidence you have for a belief, the more strongly you will believe it.
For most of my early life, I didn’t consider myself a writer. If you were to ask any of my high school teachers or college professors, they would tell you I was an average writer at best: certainly not a standout. When I began my writing career, I published a new article every Monday and Thursday for the first few years. As the evidence grew, so did my identity as a writer. I didn’t start out as a writer. I became
one through my habits.
Of course, your habits are not the only
actions that influence your identity, but by virtue of their frequency they are usually the most important ones. Each experience in life modifies your self-image, but it’s unlikely you would consider yourself a soccer player because you kicked a ball once or an artist because you scribbled a picture. As you repeat these actions, however, the evidence accumulates and your self-image begins to change. The effect of one-off experiences tends to fade away while the effect of habits gets reinforced with time, which means your habits contribute most of the evidence that shapes your identity. In this way, the process of building habits is actually the process of becoming yourself.
This is a gradual evolution. We do not change by snapping our
fingers and deciding to be someone entirely new.
We change bit by bit, day by day, habit by habit. We are continually undergoing microevolutions of the self.
Each habit is like a suggestion: “Hey, maybe this
is who I am.” If you finish a book, then perhaps you are the type of person who likes reading. If you go to the gym, then perhaps you are the type of person who likes exercise. If you practice playing the guitar, perhaps you are the type of person who likes music.
Every action you take is a vote for the type of person you wish to become. No single instance will transform your beliefs, but as the votes build up, so does the evidence of your new identity. This is one reason why meaningful change does not require radical change. Small habits can make a meaningful difference by providing evidence of a new identity. And if a change is meaningful, it actually is big. That’s the paradox of making small improvements.
Putting this all together, you can see that habits are the path to changing your identity. The most practical way to change who
you are is to change what
you do.
Each time you write a page, you are a writer.
Each time you practice the violin, you are a musician.
Each time you start a workout, you are an athlete.
Each time you encourage your employees, you are a leader.
Each habit not only gets results but also teaches you something far more important: to trust yourself. You start to believe you can actually accomplish these things. When the votes mount up and the evidence begins to change, the story you tell yourself begins to change as well.
Of course, it works the opposite way, too. Every time you choose to perform a bad habit, it’s a vote for that identity. The good news is that
you don’t need to be perfect. In any election, there are going to be votes for both sides. You don’t need a unanimous vote to win an election; you just need a majority. It doesn’t matter if you cast a few votes for a bad behavior or an unproductive habit. Your goal is simply to win the majority of the time.
New identities require new evidence. If you keep casting the same votes you’ve always cast, you’re going to get the same results you’ve always had. If nothing changes, nothing is going to change.
It is a simple two-step process:
Decide the type of person you want to be.
Prove it to yourself with small wins.
First, decide who you want to be. This holds at any level—as an individual, as a team, as a community, as a nation. What do you want to stand for? What are your principles and values? Who do you wish to become?
These are big questions, and many people aren’t sure where to begin—but they do know what kind of results they want: to get six-pack abs or to feel less anxious or to double their salary. That’s fine. Start there and work backward from the results you want to the type of person who could get those results. Ask yourself, “Who is the type of person that could get the outcome I want?” Who is the type of person that could lose forty pounds? Who is the type of person that could learn a new language? Who is the type of person that could run a successful start-up?
For example, “Who is the type of person who could write a book?” It’s probably someone who is consistent and reliable. Now your focus shifts from writing a book (outcome-based) to being the type of person who is consistent and reliable (identity-based).
This process can lead to beliefs like:
“I’m the kind of teacher who stands up for her students.”
“I’m the kind of doctor who gives each patient the time and empathy they need.”
“I’m the kind of manager who advocates for her employees.”
Once you have a handle on the type of person you want to be, you can begin taking small steps to reinforce your desired identity. I have a friend who lost over 100 pounds by asking herself, “What would a healthy person do?” All day long, she would use this question as a guide. Would a healthy person walk or take a cab? Would a healthy person order a burrito or a salad? She figured if she acted like a healthy person long enough, eventually she would become that person. She was right.
The concept of identity-based habits is our first introduction to another key theme in this book: feedback loops. Your habits shape your identity, and your identity shapes your habits. It’s a two-way street. The formation of all habits is a feedback loop (a concept we will explore in depth in the next chapter), but it’s important to let your values, principles, and identity drive the loop rather than your results. The focus should always be on becoming that type of person, not getting a particular outcome.
THE REAL REASON HABITS MATTER
Identity change is the North Star of habit change. The remainder of this book will provide you with step-by-step instructions on how to build better habits in yourself, your family, your team, your company, and anywhere else you wish. But the true question is: “Are you becoming the type of person you want to become?” The first step is not what
or how
, but who
. You need to know who you want to be. Otherwise, your quest for change is like a boat without a rudder. And that’s why we are starting here.
You have the power to change your beliefs about yourself. Your identity is not set in stone. You have a choice in every moment. You can choose the identity you want to reinforce today with the habits you choose today. And this brings us to the deeper purpose of this book and the real reason habits matter.
Building better habits isn’t about littering your day with life hacks. It’s not about flossing one tooth each night or taking a cold shower each morning or wearing the same outfit each day. It’s not about achieving external measures of success like earning more money, losing weight, or reducing stress. Habits can help you achieve all of these things, but fundamentally they are not about having
something. They are about becoming
someone.
Ultimately, your habits matter because they help you become the type of person you wish to be. They are the channel through which you develop your deepest beliefs about yourself. Quite literally, you become your habits.
Chapter Summary
There are three levels of change: outcome change, process change, and identity change.
The most effective way to change your habits is to focus not on what you want to achieve, but on who you wish to become.
Your identity emerges out of your habits. Every action is a vote for the type of person you wish to become.
Becoming the best version of yourself requires you to continuously edit your beliefs, and to upgrade and expand your identity.
The real reason habits matter is not because they can get you better results (although they can do that), but because they can change your beliefs about
yourself.

3
How to Build Better Habits in 4 Simple Steps
IN 1898
, A
psychologist named
Edward Thorndike conducted an experiment that would lay the foundation for our understanding of how habits form and the rules that guide our behavior. Thorndike was interested in studying the behavior of animals, and he started by working with cats.
He would place each cat inside a device known as a puzzle box. The box was designed so that the cat could escape through a door “
by some simple act, such as pulling at a loop of cord, pressing a lever, or stepping on a platform.” For example, one box contained a lever that, when pressed, would open a door on the side of the box. Once the door had been opened, the cat could dart out and run over to a bowl of food.
Most cats wanted to escape as soon as they were placed inside the box. They would poke their nose into the corners, stick their paws through openings, and claw at loose objects. After a few minutes of exploration, the cats would happen to press the magical lever, the door would open, and they would escape.
Thorndike tracked the behavior of each cat across many trials. In
the beginning, the animals moved around the box at random. But as soon as the lever had been pressed and the door opened, the process of learning began. Gradually, each cat learned to associate the action of pressing the lever with the reward of escaping the box and getting to the food.
After twenty to thirty trials, this behavior became so automatic and habitual that the cat could escape within a few seconds. For example, Thorndike noted, “Cat 12 took the following times to perform the act. 160 seconds, 30 seconds, 90 seconds, 60, 15, 28, 20, 30, 22, 11, 15, 20, 12, 10, 14, 10, 8, 8, 5, 10, 8, 6, 6, 7.”
During the first three trials, the cat escaped in an average of 1.5 minutes. During the last three trials, it escaped in an average of 6.3 seconds. With practice, each cat made fewer errors and their actions became quicker and more automatic. Rather than repeat the same mistakes, the cat began to cut straight to the solution.
From his studies, Thorndike described the learning process by stating, “
behaviors followed by satisfying consequences tend to be repeated and those that produce unpleasant consequences are less likely to be repeated.” His work provides the perfect starting point for discussing how habits form in our own lives. It also provides answers to some fundamental questions like: What are habits? And why does the brain bother building them at all?
WHY YOUR BRAIN BUILDS HABITS
A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times to become automatic. The process of habit formation begins with trial and error. Whenever you encounter a new situation in life, your brain has to make a decision. How do I respond to this?
The first time you come across a problem, you’re not sure how to solve it. Like Thorndike’s cat, you’re just trying things out to see what works.
Neurological activity in the brain is high during this period. You are carefully analyzing the situation and making conscious decisions about how to act. You’re taking in tons of new information and trying to make sense of it all. The brain is busy learning the most effective course of action.
Occasionally, like a cat pressing on a lever, you stumble across a solution. You’re feeling anxious, and you discover that going for a run calms you down. You’re mentally exhausted from a long day of work, and you learn that playing video games relaxes you. You’re exploring, exploring, exploring, and then—BAM—a reward.
After you stumble upon an unexpected reward, you alter your strategy for next time. Your brain immediately begins to catalog the events that preceded the reward. Wait a minute—that felt good. What did I do right before that?
This is the feedback loop behind all human behavior: try, fail, learn, try differently. With practice, the useless movements fade away and the useful actions get reinforced. That’s a habit forming.
Whenever you face a problem repeatedly, your brain begins to automate the process of solving it. Your habits are just a series of automatic solutions that solve the problems and stresses you face regularly. As behavioral scientist Jason Hreha writes, “
Habits are, simply, reliable solutions to recurring problems in our environment.”
As habits are created, the level of activity in the brain decreases
. You learn to lock in on the cues that predict success and tune out everything else. When a similar situation arises in the future, you know exactly what to look for. There is no longer a need to analyze every angle of a situation. Your brain skips the process of trial and error and creates a mental rule: if this, then that. These cognitive scripts can be followed automatically whenever the situation is appropriate. Now, whenever you feel stressed, you get the itch to run. As soon as you walk in the door from work, you grab the video game controller. A
choice that once required effort is now automatic. A habit has been created.
Habits are mental shortcuts learned from experience. In a sense, a habit is just a memory of the steps you previously followed to solve a problem in the past. Whenever the conditions are right, you can draw on this memory and automatically apply the same solution. The primary reason
the brain remembers the past is to better predict what will work in the future.
Habit formation is incredibly useful because
the conscious mind is the bottleneck of the brain. It can only pay attention to one problem at a time. As a result, your brain is always working to preserve your conscious attention for whatever task is most essential. Whenever possible,
the conscious mind likes to pawn off tasks to the nonconscious mind to do automatically. This is precisely what happens when a habit is formed.
Habits reduce cognitive load and free up mental capacity, so you can allocate your attention to other tasks.
Despite their efficiency, some people still wonder about the benefits of habits. The argument goes like this: “Will habits make my life dull? I don’t want to pigeonhole myself into a lifestyle I don’t enjoy. Doesn’t so much routine take away the vibrancy and spontaneity of life?” Hardly. Such questions set up a false dichotomy. They make you think that you have to choose between building habits and attaining freedom. In reality, the two complement each other.
Habits do not restrict freedom. They create it. In fact, the people who don’t have their habits handled are often the ones with the least
amount of freedom. Without good financial habits, you will always be struggling for the next dollar. Without good health habits, you will always seem to be short on energy. Without good learning habits, you will always feel like you’re behind the curve. If you’re always being forced to make decisions about simple tasks—when should I work out, where do
I go to write, when do I pay the bills—then you have less time for freedom. It’s only by making the fundamentals of life easier that you can create the mental space needed for free thinking and creativity.
Conversely, when you have your habits dialed in and the basics of life are handled and done, your mind is free to focus on new challenges and master the next set of problems. Building habits in the present allows you to do more of what you want in the future.
THE SCIENCE OF HOW HABITS WORK
The process of building a habit can be divided into four simple steps: cue, craving, response, and reward.
*
Breaking it down into these fundamental parts can help us understand what a habit is, how it works, and how to improve it.
FIGURE 5:
All habits proceed through four stages in the same order: cue, craving, response, and reward.
This four-step pattern is the backbone of every habit, and your brain runs through these steps in the same order each time.
First, there is the cue. The cue triggers your brain to initiate a
behavior. It is a bit of information that predicts a reward. Our prehistoric ancestors were paying attention to cues that signaled the location of primary rewards like food, water, and sex. Today, we spend most of our time learning cues that predict secondary rewards like money and fame, power and status, praise and approval, love and friendship, or a sense of personal satisfaction. (Of course, these pursuits also indirectly improve our odds of survival and reproduction, which is the deeper motive behind everything we do.)
Your mind is continuously analyzing your internal and external environment for hints of where rewards are located. Because the cue is the first indication that we’re close to a reward, it naturally leads to a craving.
Cravings are the second step, and they are the motivational force behind every habit. Without some level of motivation or desire—without craving a change—we have no reason to act. What you crave is not the habit itself but the change in state it delivers. You do not crave smoking a cigarette, you crave the feeling of relief it provides. You are not motivated by brushing your teeth but rather by the feeling of a clean mouth. You do not want to turn on the television, you want to be entertained. Every craving is linked to a desire to change your internal state. This is an important point that we will discuss in detail later.
Cravings differ from person to person. In theory, any piece of information could trigger a craving, but in practice, people are not motivated by the same cues. For a gambler, the sound of slot machines can be a potent trigger that sparks an intense wave of desire. For someone who rarely gambles, the jingles and chimes of the casino are just background noise. Cues are meaningless until they are interpreted. The thoughts, feelings, and emotions of the observer are what transform a cue into a craving.
The third step is the response. The response is the actual habit you perform, which can take the form of a thought or an action. Whether
a response occurs depends on how motivated you are and how much friction is associated with the behavior. If a particular action requires more physical or mental effort than you are willing to expend, then you won’t do it. Your response also depends on your ability. It sounds simple, but a habit can occur only if you are capable of doing it. If you want to dunk a basketball but can’t jump high enough to reach the hoop, well, you’re out of luck.
Finally, the response delivers a reward. Rewards are the end goal of every habit. The cue is about noticing the reward. The craving is about wanting the reward. The response is about obtaining the reward. We chase rewards because they serve two purposes: (1) they satisfy us and (2) they teach us.
The first purpose of rewards is to satisfy your craving
. Yes, rewards provide benefits on their own. Food and water deliver the energy you need to survive. Getting a promotion brings more money and respect. Getting in shape improves your health and your dating prospects. But the more immediate benefit is that rewards satisfy your craving to eat or to gain status or to win approval. At least for a moment, rewards deliver contentment and relief from craving.
Second, rewards teach us which actions are worth remembering in the future. Your brain is a reward detector. As you go about your life, your sensory nervous system is continuously monitoring which actions satisfy your desires and deliver pleasure.
Feelings of pleasure and disappointment are part of the feedback mechanism that helps your brain distinguish useful actions from useless ones. Rewards close the feedback loop and complete the habit cycle.
If a behavior is insufficient in any of the four stages, it will not become a habit. Eliminate the cue and your habit will never start. Reduce the craving and you won’t experience enough motivation to act. Make the behavior difficult and you won’t be able to do it. And if the reward fails to satisfy your desire, then you’ll have no reason to do it again in
the future. Without the first three steps, a behavior will not occur. Without all four, a behavior will not be repeated.
THE HABIT LOOP
FIGURE 6:
The four stages of habit are best described as a feedback loop. They form an endless cycle that is running every moment you are alive. This “habit loop” is continually scanning the environment, predicting what will happen next, trying out different responses, and learning from the results.
*
In summary, the cue triggers a craving, which motivates a response, which provides a reward, which satisfies the craving and, ultimately, becomes associated with the cue. Together, these four steps form a neurological feedback loop—cue, craving, response, reward;
cue, craving, response, reward—that ultimately allows you to create automatic habits. This cycle is known as the habit loop.
This four-step process is not something that happens occasionally, but rather it is an endless feedback loop that is running and active during every moment you are alive—even now. The brain is continually scanning the environment, predicting what will happen next, trying out different responses, and learning from the results. The entire process is completed in a split second, and we use it again and again without realizing everything that has been packed into the previous moment.
We can split these four steps into two phases: the problem phase and the solution phase. The problem phase includes the cue and the craving, and it is when you realize that something needs to change. The solution phase includes the response and the reward, and it is when you take action and achieve the change you desire.
Problem phase
1. Cue
2. Craving
Solution phase
3. Response
4. Reward
All behavior is driven by the desire to solve a problem. Sometimes the problem is that you notice something good and you want to obtain it. Sometimes the problem is that you are experiencing pain and you want to relieve it. Either way, the purpose of every habit is to solve the problems you face.
In the table on the following page, you can see a few examples of what this looks like in real life.
Imagine walking into a dark room and flipping on the light switch. You have performed this simple habit so many times that it occurs without thinking. You proceed through all four stages in the fraction of a second. The urge to act strikes you without thinking.
Problem phase
1. Cue:
Your phone buzzes with a new text message.
2. Craving:
You want to learn the contents of the message.
Solution phase
3. Response:
You grab your phone and read the text.
4. Reward:
You satisfy your craving to read the message. Grabbing your phone becomes associated with your phone buzzing.
Problem phase
1. Cue:
You are answering emails.
2. Craving:
You begin to feel stressed and overwhelmed by work. You want to feel in control.
Solution phase
3. Response:
You bite your nails.
4. Reward:
You satisfy your craving to reduce stress. Biting your nails becomes associated with answering email.
Problem phase
1. Cue:
You wake up.
2. Craving:
You want to feel alert.
Solution phase
3. Response:
You drink a cup of coffee.
4. Reward:
You satisfy your craving to feel alert. Drinking coffee becomes associated with waking up.
Problem phase
1. Cue:
You smell a doughnut shop as you walk down the street near your office.
2. Craving:
You begin to crave a doughnut.
Solution phase
3. Response:
You buy a doughnut and eat it.
4. Reward:
You satisfy your craving to eat a doughnut. Buying a doughnut becomes associated with walking down the street near your office.
Problem phase
1. Cue:
You hit a stumbling block on a project at work.
2. Craving:
You feel stuck and want to relieve your frustration.
Solution phase
3. Response:
You pull out your phone and check social media.
4. Reward:
You satisfy your craving to feel relieved. Checking social media becomes associated with feeling stalled at work.
Problem phase
1. Cue:
You walk into a dark room.
2. Craving:
You want to be able to see.
Solution phase
3. Response:
You flip the light switch.
4. Reward:
You satisfy your craving to see. Turning on the light switch becomes associated with being in a dark room.
By the time we become adults, we rarely notice the habits that are running our lives. Most of us never give a second thought to the fact that we tie the same shoe first each morning, or unplug the toaster after each use, or always change into comfortable clothes after getting home from work. After decades of mental programming, we automatically slip into these patterns of thinking and acting.
THE FOUR LAWS OF BEHAVIOR CHANGE
In the following chapters, we will see time and again how the four stages of cue, craving, response, and reward influence nearly everything we do each day. But before we do that, we need to transform these four steps into a practical framework that we can use to design good habits and eliminate bad ones.
I refer to this framework as the Four Laws of Behavior Change
, and it provides a simple set of rules for creating good habits and breaking bad
ones. You can think of each law as a lever that influences human behavior. When the levers are in the right positions, creating good habits is effortless. When they are in the wrong positions, it is nearly impossible.
How to Create a Good Habit
The 1st law (Cue):
Make it obvious.
The 2nd law (Craving):
Make it attractive.
The 3rd law (Response):
Make it easy.
The 4th law (Reward):
Make it satisfying.
We can invert these laws to learn how to break a bad habit.
How to Break a Bad Habit
Inversion of the 1st law (Cue):
Make it invisible.
Inversion of the 2nd law (Craving):
Make it unattractive.
Inversion of the 3rd law (Response):
Make it difficult.
Inversion of the 4th law (Reward):
Make it unsatisfying.
It would be irresponsible for me to claim that these four laws are an exhaustive framework for changing any
human behavior, but I think they’re close. As you will soon see, the Four Laws of Behavior Change apply to nearly every field, from sports to politics, art to medicine, comedy to management. These laws can be used no matter what challenge you are facing. There is no need for completely different strategies for each habit.
Whenever you want to change your behavior, you can simply ask yourself:
How can I make it obvious?
How can I make it attractive?
How can I make it easy?
How can I make it satisfying?
If you have ever wondered, “Why don’t I do what I say I’m going to do? Why don’t I lose the weight or stop smoking or save for retirement or start that side business? Why do I say something is important but never seem to make time for it?” The answers to those questions can be found somewhere in these four laws. The key to creating good habits and breaking bad ones is to understand these fundamental laws and how to alter them to your specifications. Every goal is doomed to fail if it goes against the grain of human nature.
Your habits are shaped by the systems in your life. In the chapters that follow, we will discuss these laws one by one and show how you can use them to create a system in which good habits emerge naturally and bad habits wither away.
Chapter Summary
A habit is a behavior that has been repeated enough times to become automatic.
The ultimate purpose of habits is to solve the problems of life with as little energy and effort as possible.
Any habit can be broken down into a feedback loop that involves four steps: cue, craving, response, and reward.
The Four Laws of Behavior Change are a simple set of rules we can use to build better habits. They are (1) make it obvious, (2) make it attractive, (3) make it easy, and (4) make it
satisfying.

THE 1ST LAW
Make It
Obvious

4
The Man Who Didn’t Look Right
THE PSYCHOLOGIST
GARY
Klein once told me a story about a woman who attended a family gathering. She had spent years working as a paramedic and, upon arriving at the event, took one look at her father-in-law and got very concerned.
“I don’t like the way you look,” she said.
Her father-in-law, who was feeling perfectly fine, jokingly replied, “Well, I don’t like your looks, either.”
“No,” she insisted. “You need to go to the hospital now.”
A few hours later, the man was undergoing lifesaving surgery after an examination had revealed that he had a blockage to a major artery and was at immediate risk of a heart attack. Without his daughter-in-law’s intuition, he could have died.
What did the paramedic see? How did she predict his impending heart attack?
When major arteries are obstructed, the body focuses on sending blood to critical organs and away from peripheral locations near the surface of the skin. The result is a change in the pattern of distribution of blood in the face. After many years of working with people with
heart failure, the woman had unknowingly developed the ability to recognize this pattern on sight. She couldn’t explain what it was that she noticed in her father-in-law’s face, but she knew something was wrong.
Similar stories exist in other fields. For example,
military analysts can identify which blip on a radar screen is an enemy missile and which one is a plane from their own fleet even though they are traveling at the same speed, flying at the same altitude, and look identical on radar in nearly every respect. During the Gulf War, Lieutenant Commander Michael Riley saved an entire battleship when he ordered a missile shot down—despite the fact that it looked exactly like the battleship’s own planes on radar. He made the right call, but even his superior officers couldn’t explain how he did it.
Museum curators have been known to discern the difference between an authentic piece of art and an expertly produced counterfeit even though they can’t tell you precisely which details tipped them off.
Experienced radiologists can look at a brain scan and predict the area where a stroke will develop before any obvious signs are visible to the untrained eye. I’ve even heard of hairdressers noticing whether a client is pregnant based only on the feel of her hair.
The human brain is a prediction machine. It is continuously taking in your surroundings and analyzing the information it comes across. Whenever you experience something repeatedly—like a paramedic seeing the face of a heart attack patient or a military analyst seeing a missile on a radar screen—your brain begins noticing what is important, sorting through the details and highlighting the relevant cues, and cataloging that information for future use.
With enough practice, you can pick up on the cues that predict certain outcomes without consciously thinking about it. Automatically, your brain encodes the lessons learned through experience. We can’t
always explain what it is we are learning, but learning is happening all along the way, and your ability to notice the relevant cues in a given situation is the foundation for every habit you have.
We underestimate how much our brains and bodies can do without thinking. You do not tell your hair to grow, your heart to pump, your lungs to breathe, or your stomach to digest. And yet your body handles all this and more on autopilot. You are much more than your conscious self.
Consider hunger. How do you know when you’re hungry? You don’t necessarily have to see a cookie on the counter to realize that it is time to eat. Appetite and hunger are governed nonconsciously. Your body has a variety of feedback loops that gradually alert you when it is time to eat again and that track what is going on around you and within you. Cravings can arise thanks to hormones and chemicals circulating through your body. Suddenly, you’re hungry even though you’re not quite sure what tipped you off.
This is one of the most surprising insights about our habits: you don’t need to be aware of the cue for a habit to begin. You can notice an opportunity and take action without dedicating conscious attention to it. This is what makes habits useful.
It’s also what makes them dangerous. As habits form, your actions come under the direction of your automatic and nonconscious mind. You fall into old patterns before you realize what’s happening. Unless someone points it out, you may not notice that you cover your mouth with your hand whenever you laugh, that you apologize before asking a question, or that you have a habit of finishing other people’s sentences. And the more you repeat these patterns, the less likely you become to question what you’re doing and why you’re doing it.
I once heard of a retail clerk who was instructed to cut up empty gift cards after customers had used up the balance on the card. One day,
the clerk cashed out a few customers in a row who purchased with gift cards. When the next person walked up,
the clerk swiped the customer’s actual credit card, picked up the scissors, and then cut it in half—entirely on autopilot—before looking up at the stunned customer and realizing what had just happened.
Another woman I came across in my research was a former preschool teacher who had switched to a corporate job. Even though she was now working with adults, her old habits would kick in and
she kept asking coworkers if they had washed their hands after going to the bathroom. I also found the
story of a man who had spent years working as a lifeguard and would occasionally yell “Walk!” whenever he saw a child running.
Over time, the cues that spark our habits become so common that they are essentially invisible: the treats on the kitchen counter, the remote control next to the couch, the phone in our pocket. Our responses to these cues are so deeply encoded that it may feel like the urge to act comes from nowhere. For this reason, we must begin the process of behavior change with awareness.
Before we can effectively build new habits, we need to get a handle on our current ones. This can be more challenging than it sounds because once a habit is firmly rooted in your life, it is mostly nonconscious and automatic. If a habit remains mindless, you can’t expect to improve it. As the psychologist Carl Jung said, “
Until you make the unconscious conscious, it will direct your life and you will call it fate.”
THE HABITS SCORECARD
The Japanese railway system is regarded as one of the best in the world. If you ever find yourself riding a train in Tokyo, you’ll notice that the conductors have a peculiar habit.
As each operator runs the train, they proceed through a ritual of pointing at different objects and calling out commands. When the train approaches a signal, the operator will point at it and say, “Signal is green.” As the train pulls into and out of each station, the operator will point at the speedometer and call out the exact speed. When it’s time to leave, the operator will point at the timetable and state the time. Out on the platform, other employees are performing similar actions. Before each train departs, staff members will point along the edge of the platform and declare, “All clear!” Every detail is identified, pointed at, and named aloud.
*
This process, known as Pointing-and-Calling
, is a safety system designed to reduce mistakes. It seems silly, but it works incredibly well.
Pointing-and-Calling reduces errors by up to 85 percent and cuts accidents by 30 percent.
The MTA subway system in New York City adopted a modified version that is “point-only,” and “within two years of implementation, incidents of incorrectly berthed subways fell 57 percent.”
Pointing-and-Calling is so effective because it raises the level of awareness from a nonconscious habit to a more conscious level. Because the train operators must use their eyes, hands, mouth, and ears, they are more likely to notice problems before something goes wrong.
My wife does something similar. Whenever we are preparing to walk out the door for a trip, she verbally calls out the most essential
items in her packing list. “I’ve got my keys. I’ve got my wallet. I’ve got my glasses. I’ve got my husband.”
The more automatic a behavior becomes, the less likely we are to consciously think about it. And when we’ve done something a thousand times before, we begin to overlook things. We assume that the next time will be just like the last. We’re so used to doing what we’ve always done that we don’t stop to question whether it’s the right thing to do at all. Many of our failures in performance are largely attributable to a lack of self-awareness.
One of our greatest challenges in changing habits is maintaining awareness of what we are actually doing. This helps explain why the consequences of bad habits can sneak up on us. We need a “point-and-call” system for our personal lives. That’s the origin of the Habits Scorecard, which is a simple exercise you can use to become more aware of your behavior. To create your own, make a list of your daily habits.
Here’s a sample of where your list might start:
Wake up
Turn off alarm
Check my phone
Go to the bathroom
Weigh myself
Take a shower
Brush my teeth
Floss my teeth
Put on deodorant
Hang up towel to dry
Get dressed
Make a cup of tea
. . . and so on.
Once you have a full list, look at each behavior, and ask yourself, “Is this a good habit, a bad habit, or a neutral habit?” If it is a good habit, write “+” next to it. If it is a bad habit, write “–”. If it is a neutral habit, write “=”.
For example, the list above might look like this:
Wake up =
Turn off alarm =
Check my phone –
Go to the bathroom =
Weigh myself +
Take a shower +
Brush my teeth +
Floss my teeth +
Put on deodorant +
Hang up towel to dry =
Get dressed =
Make a cup of tea +
The marks you give to a particular habit will depend on your situation and your goals. For someone who is trying to lose weight, eating a bagel with peanut butter every morning might be a bad habit. For someone who is trying to bulk up and add muscle, the same behavior might be a good habit. It all depends on what you’re working toward.
*
Scoring your habits can be a bit more complex for another reason as well. The labels “good habit” and “bad habit” are slightly inaccurate. There are no good habits or bad habits. There are only effective habits. That is, effective at solving problems. All habits serve you in some way—even the bad ones—which is why you repeat them. For this exercise, categorize your habits by how they will benefit you in the long run. Generally speaking, good habits will have net positive outcomes. Bad habits have net negative outcomes. Smoking a cigarette may reduce stress right now (that’s how it’s serving you), but it’s not a healthy long-term behavior.
If you’re still having trouble determining how to rate a particular habit, here is a question I like to use: “Does this behavior help me become the type of person I wish to be? Does this habit cast a vote for or against my desired identity?” Habits that reinforce your desired identity are usually good. Habits that conflict with your desired identity are usually bad.
As you create your Habits Scorecard, there is no need to change anything at first. The goal is to simply notice what is actually going on. Observe your thoughts and actions without judgment or internal
criticism. Don’t blame yourself for your faults. Don’t praise yourself for your successes.
If you eat a chocolate bar every morning, acknowledge it, almost as if you were watching someone else. Oh, how interesting that they would do such a thing.
If you binge-eat, simply notice that you are eating more calories than you should. If you waste time online, notice that you are spending your life in a way that you do not want to.
The first step to changing bad habits is to be on the lookout for them. If you feel like you need extra help, then you can try Pointing-and-Calling in your own life. Say out loud the action that you are thinking of taking and what the outcome will be. If you want to cut back on your junk food habit but notice yourself grabbing another cookie, say out loud, “I’m about to eat this cookie, but I don’t need it. Eating it will cause me to gain weight and hurt my health.”
Hearing your bad habits spoken aloud makes the consequences seem more real. It adds weight to the action rather than letting yourself mindlessly slip into an old routine. This approach is useful even if you’re simply trying to remember a task on your to-do list. Just saying out loud, “Tomorrow, I need to go to the post office after lunch,” increases the odds that you’ll actually do it. You’re getting yourself to acknowledge the need for action—and that can make all the difference.
The process of behavior change always starts with awareness. Strategies like Pointing-and-Calling and the Habits Scorecard are focused on getting you to recognize your habits and acknowledge the cues that trigger them, which makes it possible to respond in a way that benefits you.
Chapter Summary
With enough practice, your brain will pick up on the cues that predict certain outcomes without consciously thinking about it.
Once our habits become automatic, we stop paying attention to what we are doing.
The process of behavior change always starts with awareness. You need to be aware of your habits before you can change them.
Pointing-and-Calling raises your level of awareness from a nonconscious habit to a more conscious level by verbalizing your actions.
The Habits Scorecard is a simple exercise you can use to become more aware of your
behavior.

5
The Best Way to Start a New Habit
IN 2001
,
RESEARCHERS
in Great Britain began working with 248 people to build better exercise habits over the course of two weeks. The subjects were divided into three groups.
The first group was the control group. They were simply asked to track how often they exercised.
The second group was the “motivation” group. They were asked not only to track their workouts but also to read some material on the benefits of exercise. The researchers also explained to the group how exercise could reduce the risk of coronary heart disease and improve heart health.
Finally, there was the third group. These subjects received the same presentation as the second group, which ensured that they had equal levels of motivation. However, they were also asked to formulate a plan for when and where they would exercise over the following week. Specifically, each member of the third group completed the following sentence: “During the next week, I will partake in at least 20 minutes of vigorous exercise on [DAY] at [TIME] in [PLACE].”
In the first and second groups, 35 to 38 percent of people exercised
at least once per week. (Interestingly, the motivational presentation given to the second group seemed to have no meaningful impact on behavior.) But 91 percent of the third group exercised at least once per week—more than double the normal rate.
The sentence they filled out is what researchers refer to as an implementation intention
, which is a plan you make beforehand about when and where to act. That is, how you intend
to implement
a particular habit.
The cues that can trigger a habit come in a wide range of forms—the feel of your phone buzzing in your pocket, the smell of chocolate chip cookies, the sound of ambulance sirens—but the two most common cues are time and location. Implementation intentions leverage both of these cues.
Broadly speaking, the format for creating an implementation intention is:
“When situation X arises, I will perform response Y.”
Hundreds of studies have shown that
implementation intentions are effective for sticking to our goals, whether it’s
writing down the exact time and date of when you will get a flu shot or
recording the time of your colonoscopy appointment. They increase the odds that people will stick with habits like recycling, studying, going to sleep early, and stopping smoking.
Researchers have even found that
voter turnout increases when people are forced to create implementation intentions by answering questions like: “What route are you taking to the polling station? At what time are you planning to go? What bus will get you there?”
Other successful government programs have prompted citizens to make a clear plan to send taxes in on time or provided directions on when and where to pay late traffic bills.
The punch line is clear:
people who make a specific plan for when
and where they will perform a new habit are more likely to follow through. Too many people try to change their habits without these basic details figured out. We tell ourselves, “I’m going to eat healthier” or “I’m going to write more,” but we never say when and where these habits are going to happen. We leave it up to chance and hope that we will “just remember to do it” or feel motivated at the right time. An implementation intention sweeps away foggy notions like “I want to work out more” or “I want to be more productive” or “I should vote” and transforms them into a concrete plan of action.
Many people think they lack motivation when what they really lack is clarity. It is not always obvious when and where to take action. Some people spend their entire lives waiting for the time to be right to make an improvement.
Once an implementation intention has been set, you don’t have to wait for inspiration to strike. Do I write a chapter today or not? Do I meditate this morning or at lunch?
When the moment of action occurs, there is no need to make a decision. Simply follow your predetermined plan.
The simple way to apply this strategy to your habits is to fill out this sentence:
I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].
Meditation. I will meditate for one minute at 7 a.m. in my kitchen.
Studying. I will study Spanish for twenty minutes at 6 p.m. in my bedroom.
Exercise. I will exercise for one hour at 5 p.m. in my local gym.
Marriage. I will make my partner a cup of tea at 8 a.m. in the kitchen.
If you aren’t sure when to start your habit, try the first day of the week, month, or year. People are more likely to take action at those
times because
hope is usually higher. If we have hope, we have a reason to take action. A fresh start feels motivating.
There is another benefit to implementation intentions. Being specific about what you want and how you will achieve it helps you say no to things that derail progress, distract your attention, and pull you off course. We often say yes to little requests because we are not clear enough about what we need to be doing instead. When your dreams are vague, it’s easy to rationalize little exceptions all day long and never get around to the specific things you need to do to succeed.
Give your habits a time and a space to live in the world. The goal is to make the time and location so obvious that, with enough repetition, you get an urge to do the right thing at the right time, even if you can’t say why. As the
writer Jason Zweig noted, “Obviously you’re never going to just work out without conscious thought. But like a dog salivating at a bell, maybe you start to get antsy around the time of day you normally work out.”
There are
many ways to use implementation intentions in your life and work. My favorite approach is one I learned from Stanford professor BJ Fogg and it is a strategy I refer to as habit stacking
.
HABIT STACKING: A SIMPLE PLAN TO OVERHAUL YOUR HABITS
The French philosopher Denis Diderot lived nearly his entire life in poverty, but that all changed one day in 1765.
Diderot’s daughter was about to be married and he could not afford to pay for the wedding. Despite his lack of wealth, Diderot was well known for his role as the co-founder and writer of Encyclopédie
, one of the most comprehensive encyclopedias of the time. When Catherine the Great, the Empress of Russia, heard of Diderot’s financial troubles, her heart went out to him. She was a book lover and greatly enjoyed his encyclopedia. She offered to buy Diderot’s personal library for
£1,000—more than $150,000 today.
*
Suddenly, Diderot had money to spare. With his new wealth, he not only paid for the wedding but also
acquired a scarlet robe for himself.
Diderot’s scarlet robe was beautiful. So beautiful, in fact, that he immediately noticed how out of place it seemed when surrounded by his more common possessions. He wrote that there was “
no more coordination, no more unity, no more beauty” between his elegant robe and the rest of his stuff.
Diderot soon felt the urge to upgrade his possessions. He replaced his rug with one from Damascus. He decorated his home with expensive sculptures. He bought a mirror to place above the mantel, and a better kitchen table. He tossed aside his old straw chair for a leather one. Like falling dominoes, one purchase led to the next.
Diderot’s behavior is not uncommon. In fact, the tendency for one purchase to lead to another one has a name: the Diderot Effect.
The Diderot Effect states that obtaining a new possession often creates a spiral of consumption that leads to additional purchases.
You can spot this pattern everywhere. You buy a dress and have to get new shoes and earrings to match. You buy a couch and suddenly question the layout of your entire living room. You buy a toy for your child and soon find yourself purchasing all of the accessories that go with it. It’s a chain reaction of purchases.
Many human behaviors follow this cycle. You often decide what to do next based on what you have just finished doing. Going to the bathroom leads to washing and drying your hands, which reminds you that you need to put the dirty towels in the laundry, so you add laundry detergent to the shopping list, and so on. No behavior happens in isolation. Each action becomes a cue that triggers the next behavior.
Why is this important?
When it comes to building new habits, you can use the connectedness of behavior to your advantage. One of the best ways to build a new habit is to identify a current habit you already do each day and then stack your new behavior on top. This is called habit stacking
.
Habit stacking is a special form of an implementation intention. Rather than pairing your new habit with a particular time and location, you pair it with a current habit. This method,
which was created by BJ Fogg as part of his Tiny Habits program, can be used to design an obvious cue for nearly any habit.
*
The habit stacking formula is:
“After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
For example:
Meditation. After I pour my cup of coffee each morning, I will meditate for one minute.
Exercise. After I take off my work shoes, I will immediately change into my workout clothes.
Gratitude. After I sit down to dinner, I will say one thing I’m grateful for that happened today.
Marriage. After I get into bed at night, I will give my partner a kiss.
Safety. After I put on my running shoes, I will text a friend or family member where I am running and how long it will take.
The key is to tie your desired behavior into something you already do each day. Once you have mastered this basic structure, you can begin to create larger stacks by chaining small habits together. This allows you to
take advantage of the natural momentum that comes from one behavior leading into the next—a positive version of the Diderot Effect.
HABIT STACKING
FIGURE 7:
Habit stacking increases the likelihood that you’ll stick with a habit by stacking your new behavior on top of an old one. This process can be repeated to chain numerous habits together, each one acting as the cue for the next.
Your morning routine habit stack might look like this:
After I pour my morning cup of coffee, I will meditate for sixty seconds.
After I meditate for sixty seconds, I will write my to-do list for the day.
After I write my to-do list for the day, I will immediately begin my first task.
Or, consider this habit stack in the evening:
After I finish eating dinner, I will put my plate directly into the dishwasher.
After I put my dishes away, I will immediately wipe down the counter.
After I wipe down the counter, I will set out my coffee mug for tomorrow morning.
You can also insert new behaviors into the middle of your current routines. For example, you may already have a morning routine that looks like this: Wake up > Make my bed > Take a shower. Let’s say you want to develop the habit of reading more each night. You can expand your habit stack and try something like: Wake up > Make my bed > Place a book on my pillow
> Take a shower. Now, when you climb into bed each night, a book will be sitting there waiting for you to enjoy.
Overall, habit stacking allows you to create a set of simple rules that guide your future behavior. It’s like you always have a game plan for which action should come next. Once you get comfortable with this approach, you can develop general habit stacks to guide you whenever the situation is appropriate:
Exercise. When I see a set of stairs, I will take them instead of using the elevator.
Social skills. When I walk into a party, I will introduce myself to someone I don’t know yet.
Finances. When I want to buy something over $100, I will wait twenty-four hours before purchasing.
Healthy eating. When I serve myself a meal, I will always put veggies on my plate first.
Minimalism. When I buy a new item, I will give something away. (“
One in, one out.”)
Mood. When the phone rings, I will take one deep breath and smile before answering.
Forgetfulness. When I leave a public place, I will check the table and chairs to make sure I don’t leave anything behind.
No matter how you use this strategy, the secret to creating a successful habit stack is selecting the right cue to kick things off. Unlike an implementation intention, which specifically states the time and location for a given behavior, habit stacking implicitly has the time and location built into it. When and where you choose to insert a habit into your daily routine can make a big difference. If you’re trying to add meditation into your morning routine but mornings are chaotic and your kids keep running into the room, then that may be the wrong place and time. Consider when you are most likely to be successful. Don’t ask yourself to do a habit when you’re likely to be occupied with something else.
Your cue should also have the same frequency as your desired habit. If you want to do a habit every day, but you stack it on top of a habit that only happens on Mondays, that’s not a good choice.
One way to find the right trigger for your habit stack is by brainstorming a list of your current habits. You can use your Habits Scorecard from the last chapter as a starting point. Alternatively, you can create a list with two columns. In the first column, write down the habits you do each day without fail.
*
For example:
Get out of bed.
Take a shower.
Brush your teeth.
Get dressed.
Brew a cup of coffee.
Eat breakfast.
Take the kids to school.
Start the work day.
Eat lunch.
End the work day.
Change out of work clothes.
Sit down for dinner.
Turn off the lights.
Get into bed.
Your list can be much longer, but you get the idea. In the second column, write down all of the things that happen to you each day without fail. For example:
The sun rises.
You get a text message.
The song you are listening to ends.
The sun sets.
Armed with these two lists, you can begin searching for the best place to layer your new habit into your lifestyle.
Habit stacking works best when the cue is highly specific and immediately actionable. Many people select cues that are too vague. I made this mistake myself. When I wanted to start a push-up habit, my habit stack was “When I take a break for lunch, I will do ten push-ups.” At first glance, this sounded reasonable. But soon, I realized the trigger was unclear. Would I do my push-ups before I ate lunch? After I ate lunch? Where would I do them? After a few inconsistent days, I changed my habit stack to: “When I close my laptop for lunch, I will do ten push-ups next to my desk.” Ambiguity gone.
Habits like “read more” or “eat better” are worthy causes, but these goals do not provide instruction on how and when to act. Be specific and clear: After I close the door. After I brush my teeth. After I sit
down at the table. The specificity is important. The more tightly bound your new habit is to a specific cue, the better the odds are that you will notice when the time comes to act.
The 1st Law of Behavior Change is to make it obvious.
Strategies like implementation intentions and habit stacking are among the most practical ways to create obvious cues for your habits and design a clear plan for when and where to take action.
Chapter Summary
The 1st Law of Behavior Change is make it obvious
.
The two most common cues are time and location.
Creating an implementation intention is a strategy you can use to pair a new habit with a specific time and location.
The implementation intention formula is: I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].
Habit stacking is a strategy you can use to pair a new habit with a current habit.
The habit stacking formula is: After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW
HABIT].

6
Motivation Is Overrated; Environment Often Matters More
ANNE
THORNDIKE
, A
primary care physician at Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston, had a crazy idea. She believed she could improve the eating habits of thousands of hospital staff and visitors without changing their willpower or motivation in the slightest way. In fact, she didn’t plan on talking to them at all.
Thorndike and her colleagues designed a six-month study to alter the “choice architecture” of the hospital cafeteria. They started by changing how drinks were arranged in the room. Originally, the refrigerators located next to the cash registers in the cafeteria were filled with only soda. The researchers added water as an option to each one. Additionally, they placed baskets of bottled water next to the food stations throughout the room. Soda was still in the primary refrigerators, but water was now available at all
drink locations.
Over the next three months, the number of soda sales at the hospital dropped by 11.4 percent. Meanwhile, sales of bottled water increased by 25.8 percent. They made similar adjustments—and saw similar results—with the food in the cafeteria. Nobody had said a word to anyone eating there.
BEFORE AFTER
FIGURE 8:
Here is a representation of what the cafeteria looked like before the environment design changes were made (left) and after (right). The shaded boxes indicate areas where bottled water was available in each instance. Because the amount of water in the environment was increased, behavior shifted naturally and without additional motivation.
People often
choose products not because of what
they are, but because of where
they are. If I walk into the kitchen and see a plate of cookies on the counter, I’ll pick up half a dozen and start eating, even if I hadn’t been thinking about them beforehand and didn’t necessarily feel hungry. If the communal table at the office is always filled with doughnuts and bagels, it’s going to be hard not to grab one every now and then. Your habits change depending on the room you are in and the cues in front of you.
Environment is the invisible hand that shapes human behavior.
Despite our unique personalities, certain behaviors tend to arise again and again under certain environmental conditions. In church, people tend to talk in whispers. On a dark street, people act wary and guarded. In this way, the most common form of change is not internal, but external: we are changed by the world around us. Every habit is context dependent.
In 1936, psychologist Kurt Lewin wrote a simple equation that makes a powerful statement:
Behavior is a function of the Person in their Environment, or B = f
(P,E).
It didn’t take long for Lewin’s Equation to be tested in business. In 1952, the economist Hawkins Stern described a phenomenon he called
Suggestion Impulse Buying
, which “is triggered when a shopper sees a product for the first time and visualizes a need for it.” In other words, customers will occasionally buy products not because they want
them but because of how they are presented
to them.
For example, items at eye level tend to be purchased more than those down near the floor. For this reason, you’ll find expensive brand names featured in easy-to-reach locations on store shelves because they drive the most profit, while cheaper alternatives are tucked away in harder-to-reach spots. The same goes for end caps, which are the units at the end of aisles. End caps are moneymaking machines for retailers because they are obvious locations that encounter a lot of foot traffic. For example,
45 percent of Coca-Cola sales come specifically from end-of-the-aisle racks.
The more obviously available a product or service is, the more likely you are to try it.
People drink Bud Light because it is in every bar and visit Starbucks because it is on every corner. We like to think that we are in control. If we choose water over soda, we assume it is because we wanted to do so. The truth, however, is that many of the actions we take each day are shaped not by purposeful drive and choice but by the most obvious option.
Every living being has its own methods for sensing and understanding the world. Eagles have remarkable long-distance vision. Snakes can smell by “tasting the air” with their highly sensitive tongues. Sharks can detect small amounts of electricity and vibrations in the water caused by nearby fish. Even bacteria have chemoreceptors—tiny sensory cells that allow them to detect toxic chemicals in their environment.
In humans, perception is directed by the sensory nervous system. We perceive the world through sight, sound, smell, touch, and taste. But we also have other ways of sensing stimuli. Some are conscious, but many are nonconscious. For instance, you can “notice” when the temperature drops before a storm, or when the pain in your gut rises during a stomachache, or when you fall off balance while walking on rocky ground. Receptors in your body pick up on a wide range of internal stimuli, such as the amount of salt in your blood or the need to drink when thirsty.
The most powerful of all human sensory abilities, however, is vision.
The human body has about eleven million sensory receptors. Approximately ten million of those are dedicated to sight. Some experts estimate that
half of the brain’s resources are used on vision. Given that we are more dependent on vision than on any other sense, it should come as no surprise that visual cues are the greatest catalyst of our behavior. For this reason, a small change in what you see
can lead to a big shift in what you do
. As a result, you can imagine how important it is to live and work in environments that are filled with productive cues and devoid of unproductive ones.
Thankfully, there is good news in this respect. You don’t have to be the victim of your environment. You can also be the architect of it.
HOW TO DESIGN YOUR ENVIRONMENT FOR SUCCESS
During the energy crisis and oil embargo of the 1970s, Dutch researchers began to pay close attention to the country’s energy usage. In one suburb near Amsterdam, they found that some homeowners used 30 percent less energy than their neighbors—despite the homes being of similar size and getting electricity for the same price.
It turned out the houses in this neighborhood were nearly identical except for one feature: the location of the electrical meter. Some had one in the basement. Others had the electrical meter upstairs in the main hallway. As you may guess, the homes with the meters located in the main hallway used less electricity.
When their energy use was obvious and easy to track, people changed their behavior.
Every habit is initiated by a cue, and we are more likely to notice cues that stand out. Unfortunately, the environments where we live and work often make it easy not
to do certain actions because there is no obvious cue to trigger the behavior. It’s easy not
to practice the guitar when it’s tucked away in the closet. It’s easy not
to read a book when the bookshelf is in the corner of the guest room. It’s easy not
to take your vitamins when they are out of sight in the pantry. When the cues that spark a habit are subtle or hidden, they are easy to ignore.
By comparison, creating obvious visual cues can draw your attention toward a desired habit. In the early 1990s, the cleaning staff at Schiphol Airport in Amsterdam installed a small sticker that looked like a fly near the center of each urinal. Apparently, when men stepped up to the urinals, they aimed for what they thought was a bug. The stickers improved their aim and significantly reduced “spillage” around the urinals. Further analysis determined that
the stickers cut bathroom cleaning costs by 8 percent per year.
I’ve experienced the power of obvious cues in my own life. I used to buy apples from the store, put them in the crisper in the bottom of the
refrigerator, and forget all about them. By the time I remembered, the apples would have gone bad. I never saw them, so I never ate them.
Eventually, I took my own advice and redesigned my environment. I bought a large display bowl and placed it in the middle of the kitchen counter. The next time I bought apples, that was where they went—out in the open where I could see them. Almost like magic, I began eating a few apples each day simply because they were obvious rather than out of sight.
Here are a few ways you can redesign your environment and make the cues for your preferred habits more obvious:
If you want to remember to take your medication each night, put your pill bottle directly next to the faucet on the bathroom counter.
If you want to practice guitar more frequently, place your guitar stand in the middle of the living room.
If you want to remember to send more thank-you notes, keep a stack of stationery on your desk.
If you want to drink more water, fill up a few water bottles each morning and place them in common locations around the house.
If you want to make a habit a big part of your life, make the cue a big part of your environment. The most persistent behaviors usually have multiple cues. Consider how many different ways a smoker could be prompted to pull out a cigarette: driving in the car, seeing a friend smoke, feeling stressed at work, and so on.
The same strategy can be employed for good habits. By sprinkling triggers throughout your surroundings, you increase the odds that you’ll think about your habit throughout the day. Make sure the best choice is the most obvious one. Making a better decision is easy and natural when the cues for good habits are right in front of you.
Environment design is powerful not only because it influences how we engage with the world but also because we rarely do it. Most people live in a world others have created for them. But you can alter the spaces where you live and work to increase your exposure to positive cues and reduce your exposure to negative ones. Environment design allows you to take back control and become the architect of your life. Be the designer of your world and not merely the consumer of it.
THE CONTEXT IS THE CUE
The cues that trigger a habit can start out very specific, but over time your habits become associated not with a single trigger but with the entire context
surrounding the behavior.
For example, many people drink more in social situations than they would ever drink alone. The trigger is rarely a single cue, but rather the whole situation: watching your friends order drinks, hearing the music at the bar, seeing the beers on tap.
We mentally assign our habits to the locations in which they occur: the home, the office, the gym. Each location develops a connection to certain habits and routines. You establish a particular relationship with the objects on your desk, the items on your kitchen counter, the things in your bedroom.
Our behavior is not defined by the objects in the environment but by our relationship to them. In fact, this is a useful way to think about the influence of the environment on your behavior. Stop thinking about your environment as filled with objects. Start thinking about it as filled with relationships. Think in terms of how you interact with the spaces around you. For one person, her couch is the place where she reads for an hour each night. For someone else, the couch is where he watches television and eats a bowl of ice cream after work. Different
people can have different memories—and thus different habits—associated with the same place.
The good news? You can train yourself to link a particular habit with a particular context.
In one study, scientists instructed insomniacs to get into bed only when they were tired. If they couldn’t fall asleep, they were told to sit in a different room until they became sleepy. Over time, subjects began to associate the context of their bed with the action of
sleeping, and it became easier to quickly fall asleep when they climbed in bed. Their brains learned that sleeping—not browsing on their phones, not watching television, not staring at the clock—was the only action that happened in that room.
The power of context also reveals an important strategy:
habits can be easier to change in a new environment. It helps to escape the subtle triggers and cues that nudge you toward your current habits. Go to a new place—a different coffee shop, a bench in the park, a corner of your room you seldom use—and create a new routine there.
It is easier to associate a new habit with a new context than to build a new habit in the face of competing cues. It can be difficult to go to bed early if you watch television in your bedroom each night. It can be hard to study in the living room without getting distracted if that’s where you always play video games. But
when you step outside your normal environment, you leave your behavioral biases behind.
You aren’t battling old environmental cues, which allows new habits to form without interruption.
Want to think more creatively? Move to a bigger room, a rooftop patio, or a building with expansive architecture. Take a break from the space where you do your daily work, which is also linked to your current thought patterns.
Trying to eat healthier? It is likely that you shop on autopilot at your regular supermarket. Try a new grocery store. You may find it easier to
avoid unhealthy food when your brain doesn’t automatically know where it is located in the store.
When you can’t manage to get to an entirely new environment, redefine or rearrange your current one. Create a separate space for work, study, exercise, entertainment, and cooking. The mantra I find useful is “One space, one use.”
When I started my career as an entrepreneur, I would often work from my couch or at the kitchen table. In the evenings, I found it very difficult to stop working. There was no clear division between the end of work time and the beginning of personal time. Was the kitchen table my office or the space where I ate meals? Was the couch where I relaxed or where I sent emails? Everything happened in the same place.
A few years later, I could finally afford to move to a home with a separate room for my office. Suddenly, work was something that happened “in here” and personal life was something that happened “out there.” It was easier for me to turn off the professional side of my brain when there was a clear dividing line between work life and home life. Each room had one primary use. The kitchen was for cooking. The office was for working.
Whenever possible, avoid mixing the context of one habit with another. When you start mixing contexts, you’ll start mixing habits—and the easier ones will usually win out. This is one reason why the versatility of modern technology is both a strength and a weakness. You can use your phone for all sorts of tasks, which makes it a powerful device. But when you can use your phone to do nearly anything, it becomes hard to associate it with one task. You want to be productive, but you’re also conditioned to browse social media, check email, and play video games whenever you open your phone. It’s a mishmash of cues.
You may be thinking, “You don’t understand. I live in New York City. My apartment is the size of a smartphone. I need each room to
play multiple roles.” Fair enough. If your space is limited, divide your room into activity zones: a chair for reading, a desk for writing, a table for eating. You can do the same with your digital spaces. I know a writer who uses his computer only for writing, his tablet only for reading, and his phone only for social media and texting. Every habit should have a home.
If you can manage to stick with this strategy, each context will become associated with a particular habit and mode of thought. Habits thrive under predictable circumstances like these. Focus comes automatically when you are sitting at your work desk. Relaxation is easier when you are in a space designed for that purpose. Sleep comes quickly when it is the only thing that happens in your bedroom. If you want behaviors that are stable and predictable, you need an environment that is stable and predictable.
A stable environment where everything has a place and a purpose is an environment where habits can easily form.
Chapter Summary
Small changes in context can lead to large changes in behavior over time.
Every habit is initiated by a cue. We are more likely to notice cues that stand out.
Make the cues of good habits obvious in your environment.
Gradually, your habits become associated not with a single trigger but with the entire context surrounding the behavior. The context becomes the cue.
It is easier to build new habits in a new environment because you are not fighting against old cues.

7
The Secret to Self-Control
IN 1971
, as the Vietnam War was heading into its sixteenth year, congressmen Robert Steele from Connecticut and Morgan Murphy from Illinois made a discovery that stunned the American public. While visiting the troops, they had learned that over 15 percent of U.S. soldiers stationed there were heroin addicts.
Follow-up research revealed that 35 percent of service members in Vietnam had tried heroin and as many as 20 percent were addicted—the problem was even worse than they had initially thought.
The discovery led to a flurry of activity in Washington, including
the creation of the Special Action Office of Drug Abuse Prevention under President Nixon to promote prevention and rehabilitation and to track addicted service members when they returned home.
Lee Robins was one of the researchers in charge. In a finding that completely upended the accepted beliefs about addiction, Robins found that when soldiers who had been heroin users returned home, only 5 percent of them became re-addicted within a year, and just 12 percent relapsed within three years. In other words, approximately
nine out of
ten soldiers who used heroin in Vietnam eliminated their addiction nearly overnight.
This finding contradicted the prevailing view at the time, which considered heroin addiction to be a permanent and irreversible condition. Instead, Robins revealed that addictions could spontaneously dissolve if there was a radical change in the environment. In Vietnam, soldiers spent all day surrounded by cues triggering heroin use: it was easy to access, they were engulfed by the constant stress of war, they built friendships with fellow soldiers who were also heroin users, and they were thousands of miles from home. Once a soldier returned to the United States, though, he found himself in an environment devoid of those triggers. When the context changed, so did the habit.
Compare this situation to that of a typical drug user. Someone becomes addicted at home or with friends, goes to a clinic to get clean—which is devoid of all the environmental stimuli that prompt their habit—then returns to their old neighborhood with all of their previous cues that caused them to get addicted in the first place. It’s no wonder that usually you see numbers that are the exact opposite of those in the Vietnam study. Typically,
90 percent of heroin users become re-addicted once they return home from rehab.
The Vietnam studies ran counter to many of our cultural beliefs about bad habits because it challenged the conventional association of unhealthy behavior as a moral weakness. If you’re overweight, a smoker, or an addict, you’ve been told your entire life that it is because you lack self-control—maybe even that you’re a bad person. The idea that a little bit of discipline would solve all our problems is deeply embedded in our culture.
Recent research, however, shows something different. When scientists analyze people who appear to have tremendous self-control, it turns out those individuals aren’t all that different from those who are struggling. Instead, “
disciplined” people are better at structuring their
lives in a way that does not require
heroic willpower and self-control. In other words, they spend less time in tempting situations.
The people with the best self-control are typically the ones who need to use it the least.
It’s easier to practice self-restraint when you don’t have to use it very often. So, yes, perseverance, grit, and willpower are essential to success, but the way to improve these qualities is not by wishing you were a more disciplined person, but by creating a more disciplined environment.
This counterintuitive idea makes even more sense once you understand what happens when a habit is formed in the brain.
A habit that has been encoded in the mind is ready to be used whenever the relevant situation arises. When Patty Olwell, a therapist from Austin, Texas, started smoking, she would often light up while riding horses with a friend. Eventually, she quit smoking and avoided it for years. She had also stopped riding. Decades later, she hopped on a horse again and found herself craving a cigarette for the first time in forever.
The cues were still internalized; she just hadn’t been exposed to them in a long time.
Once a habit has been encoded, the urge to act follows whenever the environmental cues reappear. This is one reason behavior change techniques can backfire.
Shaming obese people with weight-loss presentations can make them feel stressed, and as a result many people return to their favorite coping strategy: overeating.
Showing pictures of blackened lungs to smokers leads to higher levels of anxiety, which drives many people to reach for a cigarette. If you’re not careful about cues, you can cause the very behavior you want to stop.
Bad habits are autocatalytic: the process feeds itself. They foster the feelings they try to numb. You feel bad, so you eat junk food. Because you eat junk food, you feel bad. Watching television makes you feel sluggish, so you watch more television because you don’t have the energy to do anything else. Worrying about your health makes you feel
anxious, which causes you to smoke to ease your anxiety, which makes your health even worse and soon you’re feeling more anxious. It’s a downward spiral, a runaway train of bad habits.
Researchers refer to this phenomenon as “cue-induced wanting”: an external trigger causes a compulsive craving to repeat a bad habit. Once you notice
something, you begin to want
it. This process is happening all the time—often without us realizing it. Scientists have found that
showing addicts a picture of cocaine for just thirty-three milliseconds stimulates the reward pathway in the brain and sparks desire. This speed is too fast for the brain to consciously register—the addicts couldn’t even tell you what they had seen—but they craved the drug all the same.
Here’s the punch line: You can break a habit, but you’re unlikely to forget it. Once the mental grooves of habit have been carved into your brain, they are nearly impossible to remove entirely—even if they go unused for quite a while. And that means that simply resisting temptation is an ineffective strategy. It is hard to maintain a Zen attitude in a life filled with interruptions. It takes too much energy. In the short-run, you can choose to overpower temptation. In the long-run, we become a product of the environment that we live in. To put it bluntly, I have never seen someone consistently stick to positive habits in a negative environment.
A more reliable approach is to cut bad habits off at the source. One of the most practical ways to eliminate a bad habit is to reduce exposure to the cue that causes it.
If you can’t seem to get any work done, leave your phone in another room for a few hours.
If you’re continually feeling like you’re not enough, stop following social media accounts that trigger jealousy and envy.
If you’re wasting too much time watching television, move the TV out of the bedroom.
If you’re spending too much money on electronics, quit reading reviews of the latest tech gear.
If you’re playing too many video games, unplug the console and put it in a closet after each use.
This practice is an inversion of the 1st Law of Behavior Change. Rather than make it obvious
, you can make it invisible
. I’m often surprised by how effective simple changes like these can be. Remove a single cue and the entire habit often fades away.
Self-control is a short-term strategy, not a long-term one. You may be able to resist temptation once or twice, but it’s unlikely you can muster the willpower to override your desires every time. Instead of summoning a new dose of willpower whenever you want to do the right thing, your energy would be better spent optimizing your environment. This is the secret to self-control. Make the cues of your good habits obvious and the cues of your bad habits invisible.
Chapter Summary
The inversion of the 1st Law of Behavior Change is make it invisible
.
Once a habit is formed, it is unlikely to be forgotten.
People with high self-control tend to spend less time in tempting situations. It’s easier to avoid temptation than resist it.
One of the most practical ways to eliminate a bad habit is to reduce exposure to the cue that causes it.
Self-control is a short-term strategy, not a long-term one.
HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT
The 1st Law:
Make It Obvious
1.1:
Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them.
1.2:
Use implementation intentions:
“I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].”
1.3:
Use habit stacking:
“After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
1.4:
Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible.
The 2nd Law:
Make It Attractive
The 3rd Law:
Make It Easy
The 4th Law:
Make It Satisfying
HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT
Inversion of the 1st Law:
Make It Invisible
1.5:
Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment.
Inversion of the 2nd Law:
Make It Unattractive
Inversion of the 3rd Law:
Make It Difficult
Inversion of the 4th Law:
Make It Unsatisfying
You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet

THE 2ND LAW
Make It
Attractive

8
How to Make a Habit Irresistible
IN THE 1940S
, a Dutch scientist named
Niko Tinbergen performed a series of experiments that transformed our understanding of what motivates us. Tinbergen—who eventually won a Nobel Prize for his work—was investigating herring gulls, the gray and white birds often seen flying along the seashores of North America.
Adult herring gulls have a small red dot on their beak, and Tinbergen noticed that newly hatched chicks would peck this spot whenever they wanted food. To begin one experiment, he created a collection of fake cardboard beaks, just a head without a body. When the parents had flown away, he went over to the nest and offered these dummy beaks to the chicks. The beaks were obvious fakes, and he assumed the baby birds would reject them altogether.
However, when the tiny gulls saw the red spot on the cardboard beak, they pecked away just as if it were attached to their own mother. They had a clear preference for those red spots—as if they had been genetically programmed at birth. Soon Tinbergen discovered that the bigger the red spot, the faster the chicks pecked. Eventually, he created a beak with three large red dots on it. When he placed it over the nest,
the baby birds went crazy with delight. They pecked at the little red patches as if it was the greatest beak they had ever seen.
Tinbergen and his colleagues discovered similar behavior in other animals. For example, the greylag goose is a ground-nesting bird. Occasionally, as the mother moves around on the nest, one of the eggs will roll out and settle on the grass nearby. Whenever this happens, the goose will waddle over to the egg and use its beak and neck to pull it back into the nest.
Tinbergen discovered that
the goose will pull any
nearby round object, such as a billiard ball or a lightbulb, back into the nest. The bigger the object, the greater their response. One goose even made a tremendous effort to roll a volleyball back and sit on top. Like the baby gulls automatically pecking at red dots, the greylag goose was following an instinctive rule: When I see a round object nearby, I must roll it back into the nest. The bigger the round object, the harder I should try to get it.
It’s like the brain of each animal is preloaded with certain rules for behavior, and when it comes across an exaggerated version of that rule, it lights up like a Christmas tree. Scientists refer to these exaggerated cues as supernormal stimuli
. A supernormal stimulus is a heightened version of reality—like a beak with three red dots or an egg the size of a volleyball—and it elicits a stronger response than usual.
Humans are also prone to fall for exaggerated versions of reality. Junk food, for example, drives our reward systems into a frenzy. After spending hundreds of thousands of years hunting and foraging for food in the wild, the human brain has evolved to place a high value on salt, sugar, and fat. Such foods are often calorie-dense and they were quite rare when our ancient ancestors were roaming the savannah. When you don’t know where your next meal is coming from, eating as much as possible is an excellent strategy for survival.
Today, however, we live in a calorie-rich environment. Food is
abundant, but your brain continues to crave it like it is scarce. Placing a high value on salt, sugar, and fat is no longer advantageous to our health, but the craving persists because the brain’s reward centers have not changed for approximately fifty thousand years.
The modern food industry relies on stretching our Paleolithic instincts beyond their evolutionary purpose.
A primary goal of food science is to create products that are more attractive to consumers.
Nearly every food in a bag, box, or jar has been enhanced in some way, if only with additional flavoring. Companies spend millions of dollars to discover the most satisfying level of crunch in a potato chip or the perfect amount of fizz in a soda. Entire departments are dedicated to optimizing how a product feels in your mouth—a quality known as orosensation
.
French fries, for example, are a potent combination—golden brown and crunchy on the outside, light and smooth on the inside.
Other processed foods enhance dynamic contrast
, which refers to items with a combination of sensations, like crunchy and creamy. Imagine the gooeyness of melted cheese on top of a crispy pizza crust, or the crunch of an Oreo cookie combined with its smooth center. With natural, unprocessed foods, you tend to experience the same sensations over and over—how’s that seventeenth bite of kale taste?
After a few minutes, your brain loses interest and you begin to feel full. But foods that are high in dynamic contrast keep the experience novel and interesting, encouraging you to eat more.
Ultimately,
such strategies enable food scientists to find the “bliss point” for each product—the precise combination of salt, sugar, and fat that excites your brain and keeps you coming back for more. The result, of course, is that you overeat because hyperpalatable foods are more attractive to the human brain. As Stephan Guyenet, a neuroscientist who specializes in eating behavior and obesity, says, “
We’ve gotten too good at pushing our own buttons.”
The modern food industry, and the overeating habits it has spawned, is just one example of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change: Make it attractive.
The more attractive an opportunity is, the more likely it is to become habit-forming.
Look around. Society is filled with highly engineered versions of reality that are more attractive than the world our ancestors evolved in. Stores feature mannequins with exaggerated hips and breasts to sell clothes. Social media delivers more “likes” and praise in a few minutes than we could ever get in the office or at home. Online porn splices together stimulating scenes at a rate that would be impossible to replicate in real life. Advertisements are created with a combination of ideal lighting, professional makeup, and Photoshopped edits—even the model doesn’t look like the person in the final image. These are the supernormal stimuli of our modern world. They exaggerate features that are naturally attractive to us, and our instincts go wild as a result, driving us into excessive shopping habits, social media habits, porn habits, eating habits, and many others.
If history serves as a guide, the opportunities of the future will be more attractive than those of today. The trend is for rewards to become more concentrated and stimuli to become more enticing. Junk food is a more concentrated form of calories than natural foods. Hard liquor is a more concentrated form of alcohol than beer. Video games are a more concentrated form of play than board games. Compared to nature, these pleasure-packed experiences are hard to resist. We have the brains of our ancestors but temptations they never had to face.
If you want to increase the odds that a behavior will occur, then you need to make it attractive. Throughout our discussion of the 2nd Law, our goal is to learn how to make our habits irresistible. While it is not possible to transform every habit into a supernormal stimulus, we can make any habit more enticing. To do this, we must start by understanding what a craving is and how it works.
We begin by examining a biological signature that all habits share—the dopamine spike.
THE DOPAMINE-DRIVEN FEEDBACK LOOP
Scientists can track the precise moment a craving occurs by measuring a neurotransmitter called dopamine.
*
The importance of dopamine became apparent in 1954 when the neuroscientists James Olds and Peter Milner ran an experiment that revealed the
neurological processes behind craving and desire. By implanting electrodes in the brains of rats, the researchers blocked the release of dopamine. To the surprise of the scientists, the
rats lost all will to live. They wouldn’t eat. They wouldn’t have sex. They didn’t crave anything. Within a few days, the animals died of thirst.
In follow-up studies, other scientists also inhibited the dopamine-releasing parts of the brain, but this time, they squirted little droplets of sugar into the mouths of the dopamine-depleted rats. Their little rat faces lit up with pleasurable grins from the tasty substance. Even though dopamine was blocked, they liked
the sugar just as much as before; they just didn’t want
it anymore. The ability to experience pleasure remained, but without dopamine, desire died. And
without desire, action stopped.
When other researchers reversed this process and flooded the reward system of the brain with dopamine, animals performed habits at breakneck speed. In one study, mice received a powerful hit of dopamine each time they poked their nose in a box. Within minutes,
the
mice developed a craving so strong they began poking their nose into the box eight hundred times per hour. (Humans are not so different:
the average slot machine player will spin the wheel six hundred times per hour.)
Habits are a
dopamine-driven feedback loop. Every behavior that is highly habit-forming—taking drugs, eating junk food, playing video games, browsing social media—is associated with higher levels of dopamine. The same can be said for our most basic habitual behaviors like eating food, drinking water, having sex, and interacting socially.
For years, scientists assumed dopamine was all about pleasure, but now we know it plays a central role in many neurological processes, including motivation, learning and memory, punishment and aversion, and voluntary movement.
When it comes to habits, the key takeaway is this:
dopamine is released not only when you experience
pleasure, but also when you anticipate
it. Gambling addicts have a dopamine spike right before
they place a bet, not after they win. Cocaine addicts get a surge of dopamine when they see
the powder, not after they take it. Whenever you predict that an opportunity will be rewarding, your levels of dopamine spike in anticipation. And
whenever dopamine rises, so does your motivation to act.
It is the anticipation of a reward—not the fulfillment of it—that gets us to take action.
Interestingly,
the reward system that is activated in the brain when you receive
a reward is the same system that is activated when you anticipate
a reward. This is one reason the anticipation of an experience can often feel better than the attainment of it. As a child, thinking about Christmas morning can be better than opening the gifts. As an adult, daydreaming about an upcoming vacation can be more enjoyable than actually being on vacation. Scientists refer to this as the difference between “wanting” and “liking.”
THE DOPAMINE SPIKE
FIGURE 9:
Before a habit is learned (A), dopamine is released when the reward is experienced for the first time. The next time around (B), dopamine rises before
taking action, immediately after a cue is recognized. This spike leads to a feeling of desire and a craving to take action whenever the cue is spotted. Once a habit is learned, dopamine will not rise when a reward is experienced because you already expect the reward. However, if you see a cue and expect a reward, but do not get one, then dopamine will drop in disappointment (C). The sensitivity of the dopamine response can clearly be seen when a reward is provided late (D). First, the cue is identified and dopamine rises as a craving builds. Next, a response is taken but the reward does not come as quickly as expected and dopamine begins to drop. Finally, when the reward comes a little later than you had hoped, dopamine spikes again. It is as if the brain is saying, “See! I knew I was right. Don’t forget to repeat this action next time.”
Your brain has far more neural circuitry allocated for wanting
rewards than for liking
them. The wanting centers in the brain are large: the brain stem, the nucleus accumbens, the ventral tegmental area, the dorsal striatum, the amygdala, and portions of the prefrontal cortex. By comparison, the liking centers of the brain are much smaller. They are often referred to as “hedonic hot spots” and are distributed like tiny islands throughout the brain. For instance, researchers have found that
100 percent of the nucleus accumbens is activated during wanting. Meanwhile, only 10 percent of the structure is activated during liking.
The fact that the brain allocates so much precious space to the regions responsible for craving and desire provides further evidence of the crucial role these processes play. Desire is the engine that drives behavior. Every action is taken because of the anticipation that precedes it. It is the craving that leads to the response.
These insights reveal the importance of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change. We need to make our habits attractive because it is the expectation of a rewarding experience that motivates us to act in the first place. This is where a strategy known as temptation bundling comes into play.
HOW TO USE TEMPTATION BUNDLING TO MAKE YOUR HABITS MORE ATTRACTIVE
Ronan Byrne, an electrical engineering student in Dublin, Ireland, enjoyed watching Netflix, but he also knew that he should exercise more often than he did. Putting his engineering skills to use,
Byrne hacked his stationary bike and connected it to his laptop and television. Then he wrote a computer program that would allow Netflix to run only
if he was cycling at a certain speed. If he slowed down for too long, whatever show he was watching would pause until he started pedaling again. He was, in the words of one fan, “
eliminating obesity one Netflix binge at a time.”
He was also employing temptation bundling to make his exercise habit more attractive. Temptation bundling works by linking an action you want to do with an action you need to do. In Byrne’s case, he bundled watching Netflix (the thing he wanted to do) with riding his stationary bike (the thing he needed to do).
Businesses are masters at temptation bundling. For instance, when the American Broadcasting Company, more commonly known as ABC, launched its Thursday-night television lineup for the 2014–2015 season, they promoted temptation bundling on a massive scale.
Every Thursday, the company would air three shows created by screenwriter Shonda Rhimes—Grey’s Anatomy
, Scandal
, and How to Get Away with Murder
. They branded it as “TGIT on ABC” (TGIT stands for Thank God It’s Thursday). In addition to promoting the shows, ABC encouraged viewers to make popcorn, drink red wine, and enjoy the evening.
Andrew Kubitz, head of scheduling for ABC, described the idea behind the campaign: “
We see Thursday night as a viewership opportunity, with either couples or women by themselves who want to sit down and escape and have fun and drink their red wine and have some popcorn.” The brilliance of this strategy is that ABC was associating the thing they needed
viewers to do (watch their shows) with activities their viewers already wanted
to do (relax, drink wine, and eat popcorn).
Over time, people began to connect watching ABC with feeling relaxed and entertained. If you drink red wine and eat popcorn at 8 p.m. every Thursday, then eventually “8 p.m. on Thursday” means
relaxation and entertainment. The reward gets associated with the cue, and the habit of turning on the television becomes more attractive.
You’re more likely to find a behavior attractive if you get to do one of your favorite things at the same time. Perhaps you want to hear about the latest celebrity gossip, but you need to get in shape. Using temptation bundling, you could only read the tabloids and watch
reality shows at the gym. Maybe you want to get a pedicure, but you need to clean out your email inbox. Solution: only get a pedicure while processing overdue work emails.
Temptation bundling is one way to apply a psychology theory known as Premack’s Principle. Named after the work of professor David Premack, the principle states that “
more probable behaviors will reinforce less probable behaviors.” In other words, even if you don’t really want to process overdue work emails, you’ll become conditioned to do it if it means you get to do something you really want to do along the way.
You can even combine temptation bundling with the habit stacking strategy we discussed in Chapter 5 to create a set of rules to guide your behavior.
The habit stacking + temptation bundling formula is:
After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [HABIT I NEED].
After [HABIT I NEED], I will [HABIT I WANT].
If you want to read the news, but you need to express more gratitude:
After I get my morning coffee, I will say one thing I’m grateful for that happened yesterday (need).
After I say one thing I’m grateful for, I will read the news (want).
If you want to watch sports, but you need to make sales calls:
After I get back from my lunch break, I will call three potential clients (need).
After I call three potential clients, I will check ESPN (want).
If you want to check Facebook, but you need to exercise more:
After I pull out my phone, I will do ten burpees (need).
After I do ten burpees, I will check Facebook (want).
The hope is that eventually you’ll look forward to calling three clients or doing ten burpees because it means you get to read the latest sports news or check Facebook. Doing the thing you need to do means you get to do the thing you want to do.
We began this chapter by discussing supernormal stimuli, which are heightened versions of reality that increase our desire to take action. Temptation bundling is one way to create a heightened version of any habit by connecting it with something you already want. Engineering a truly irresistible habit is a hard task, but this simple strategy can be employed to make nearly any habit more attractive than it would be otherwise.
Chapter Summary
The 2nd Law of Behavior Change is make it attractive.
The more attractive an opportunity is, the more likely it is to become habit-forming.
Habits are a dopamine-driven feedback loop. When dopamine rises, so does our motivation to act.
It is the anticipation of a reward—not the fulfillment of it—that gets us to take action. The greater the anticipation, the greater the dopamine spike.
Temptation bundling is one way to make your habits more attractive. The strategy is to pair an action you want
to do with an action you need
to
do.

9
The Role of Family and Friends in Shaping Your Habits
IN
1965
, a Hungarian man named Laszlo Polgar wrote a series of strange letters to a woman named Klara.
Laszlo was a firm believer in hard work. In fact, it was all he believed in: he completely rejected the idea of innate talent. He claimed that with deliberate practice and the development of good habits, a child could become a genius in any field. His mantra was “
A genius is not born, but is educated and trained.”
Laszlo believed in this idea so strongly that he wanted to test it with his own children—and he was writing to Klara because he “needed a wife willing to jump on board.” Klara was a teacher and, although she may not have been as adamant as Laszlo, she also believed that with proper instruction, anyone could advance their skills.
Laszlo decided chess would be a suitable field for the experiment, and he laid out a plan to raise his children to become chess prodigies. The kids would be home-schooled, a rarity in Hungary at the time. The house would be filled with chess books and pictures of famous chess players. The children would play against each other constantly and compete in the best tournaments they could find. The family would
keep a meticulous file system of the tournament history of every competitor the children faced. Their lives would be dedicated to chess.
Laszlo successfully courted Klara, and within a few years, the Polgars were parents to three young girls: Susan, Sofia, and Judit.
Susan, the oldest, began playing chess when she was four years old. Within six months, she was defeating adults.
Sofia, the middle child, did even better. By fourteen, she was a world champion, and a few years later, she became a grandmaster.
Judit, the youngest, was the best of all. By age five, she could beat her father. At twelve, she was the youngest player ever listed among the top one hundred chess players in the world. At fifteen years and four months old, she became the youngest grandmaster of all time—younger than Bobby Fischer, the previous record holder. For twenty-seven years, she was the number-one-ranked female chess player in the world.
The childhood of the Polgar sisters was atypical, to say the least. And yet, if you ask them about it, they claim their lifestyle was attractive, even enjoyable. In interviews, the sisters talk about their childhood as entertaining rather than grueling. They loved playing chess. They couldn’t get enough of it. Once, Laszlo reportedly found Sofia playing chess in the bathroom in the middle of the night. Encouraging her to go back to sleep, he said, “Sofia, leave the pieces alone!” To which she replied, “Daddy, they
won’t leave me
alone!”
The Polgar sisters grew up in a culture that prioritized chess above all else—praised them for it, rewarded them for it. In their world, an obsession with chess was normal. And as we are about to see, whatever habits are normal in your culture are among the most attractive behaviors you’ll find.
THE SEDUCTIVE PULL OF SOCIAL NORMS
Humans are herd animals. We want to fit in, to bond with others, and to earn the respect and approval of our peers. Such inclinations are essential to our survival. For most of our evolutionary history, our ancestors lived in tribes. Becoming separated from the tribe—or worse, being cast out—was a death sentence. “The lone wolf dies, but the pack survives.”
*
Meanwhile, those who collaborated and bonded with others enjoyed increased safety, mating opportunities, and access to resources. As Charles Darwin noted, “In the long history of humankind, those who learned to collaborate and improvise most effectively have prevailed.” As a result, one of the deepest human desires is to belong. And this ancient preference exerts a powerful influence on our modern behavior.
We don’t choose our earliest habits, we imitate them. We follow the script handed down by our friends and family, our church or school, our local community and society at large. Each of these cultures and groups comes with its own set of expectations and standards—when and whether to get married, how many children to have, which holidays to celebrate, how much money to spend on your child’s birthday party. In many ways, these social norms are the invisible rules that guide your behavior each day. You’re always keeping them in mind, even if they are at the not top of your mind. Often, you follow the habits of your culture without thinking, without questioning, and sometimes without remembering. As the French philosopher Michel de Montaigne wrote, “The customs and practices of life in society sweep us along.”
Most of the time, going along with the group does not feel like a burden. Everyone wants to belong. If you grow up in a family that
rewards you for your chess skills, playing chess will seem like a very attractive thing to do. If you work in a job where everyone wears expensive suits, then you’ll be inclined to splurge on one as well. If all of your friends are sharing an inside joke or using a new phrase, you’ll want to do it, too, so they know that you “get it.” Behaviors are attractive when they help us fit in.
We imitate the habits of three groups in particular:
The close.
The many.
The powerful.
Each group offers an opportunity to leverage the 2nd Law of Behavior Change and make our habits more attractive.
1. Imitating the Close
Proximity has a powerful effect on our behavior. This is true of the physical environment, as we discussed in Chapter 6, but it is also true of the social environment.
We pick up habits from the people around us. We copy the way our parents handle arguments, the way our peers flirt with one another, the way our coworkers get results. When your friends smoke pot, you give it a try, too. When your wife has a habit of double-checking that the door is locked before going to bed, you pick it up as well.
I find that I often imitate the behavior of those around me without realizing it. In conversation, I’ll automatically assume the body posture of the other person. In college, I began to talk like my roommates. When traveling to other countries, I unconsciously imitate the local accent despite reminding myself to stop.
As a general rule, the closer we are to someone, the more likely we
are to imitate some of their habits. One groundbreaking study tracked twelve thousand people for thirty-two years and found that “
a person’s chances of becoming obese increased by 57 percent if he or she had a friend who became obese.” It works the other way, too. Another study found that
if one person in a relationship lost weight, the other partner would also slim down about one third of the time. Our friends and family provide a sort of invisible peer pressure that pulls us in their direction.
Of course, peer pressure is bad only if you’re surrounded by bad influences. When astronaut Mike Massimino was a graduate student at MIT, he took a small robotics class.
Of the ten people in the class, four
became astronauts. If your goal was to make it into space, then that room was about the best culture you could ask for. Similarly, one study found that
the higher your best friend’s IQ at age eleven or twelve, the higher your IQ would be at age fifteen, even after controlling for natural levels of intelligence. We soak up the qualities and practices of those around us.
One of the most effective things you can do to build better habits is to join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior. New habits seem achievable when you see others doing them every day. If you are surrounded by fit people, you’re more likely to consider working out to be a common habit. If you’re surrounded by jazz lovers, you’re more likely to believe it’s reasonable to play jazz every day. Your culture sets your expectation for what is “normal.” Surround yourself with people who have the habits you want to have yourself. You’ll rise together.
To make your habits even more attractive, you can take this strategy one step further.
Join a culture where (1) your desired behavior is the normal behavior and (2) you already have something in common with the group. Steve Kamb, an entrepreneur in New York City, runs a company called
Nerd Fitness, which “helps nerds, misfits, and mutants lose weight, get strong, and get healthy.” His clients include video game lovers, movie fanatics, and average Joes who want to get in shape. Many people feel out of place the first time they go to the gym or try to change their diet, but if you are already similar to the other members of the group in some way—say, your mutual love of Star Wars
—change becomes more appealing because it feels like something people like you already do.
Nothing sustains motivation better than belonging to the tribe. It transforms a personal quest into a shared one. Previously, you were on your own. Your identity was singular. You are a reader. You are a musician. You are an athlete.
When you join a book club or a band or a cycling group, your identity becomes linked to those around you. Growth and change is no longer an individual pursuit. We are readers. We are musicians. We are cyclists.
The shared identity begins to reinforce your personal identity. This is why remaining part of a group after achieving a goal is crucial to maintaining your habits. It’s friendship and community that embed a new identity and help behaviors last over the long run.
2. Imitating the Many
In the 1950s, psychologist
Solomon Asch conducted a series of experiments that are now taught to legions of undergrads each year. To begin each experiment, the subject entered the room with a group of strangers. Unbeknownst to them, the other participants were actors planted by the researcher and instructed to deliver scripted answers to certain questions.
The group would be shown one card with a line on it and then a second card with a series of lines. Each person was asked to select the line on the second card that was similar in length to the line on the first card. It was a very simple task. Here is an example of two cards used in the experiment:
CONFORMING TO SOCIAL NORMS
FIGURE 10: This is a representation of two cards used by Solomon Asch in his famous social conformity experiments. The length of the line on the first card (left) is obviously the same as line C, but when a group of actors claimed it was a different length the research subjects would often change their minds and go with the crowd rather than believe their own eyes.
The experiment always began the same. First, there would be some easy trials where everyone agreed on the correct line. After a few rounds, the participants were shown a test that was just as obvious as the previous ones, except the actors in the room would select an intentionally incorrect
answer. For example, they would respond “A” to the comparison shown in Figure 10. Everyone would agree that the lines were the same even though they were clearly different.
The subject, who was unaware of the ruse, would immediately
become bewildered. Their eyes would open wide. They would laugh nervously to themselves. They would double-check the reactions of other participants. Their agitation would grow as one person after another delivered the same incorrect response. Soon, the subject began to doubt their own eyes. Eventually, they delivered the answer they knew in their heart to be incorrect.
Asch ran this experiment many times and in many different ways. What he discovered was that as the number of actors increased, so did the conformity of the subject. If it was just the subject and one actor, then there was no effect on the person’s choice. They just assumed they were in the room with a dummy. When two actors were in the room with the subject, there was still little impact. But as the number of people increased to three actors and four and all the way to eight, the subject became more likely to second-guess themselves.
By the end of the experiment, nearly 75 percent of the subjects had agreed with the group answer even though it was obviously incorrect.
Whenever we are unsure how to act, we look to the group to guide our behavior. We are constantly scanning our environment and wondering, “What is everyone else doing?” We check reviews on Amazon or Yelp or TripAdvisor because we want to imitate the “best” buying, eating, and travel habits. It’s usually a smart strategy. There is evidence in numbers.
But there can be a downside.
The normal behavior of the tribe often overpowers the desired behavior of the individual. For example, one study found that when
a chimpanzee learns an effective way to crack nuts open as a member of one group and then switches to a new group that uses a less effective strategy, it will avoid using the superior nut cracking method just to blend in with the rest of the chimps.
Humans are similar. There is tremendous internal pressure to comply with the norms of the group. The reward of being accepted is often
greater than the reward of winning an argument, looking smart, or finding truth. Most days, we’d rather be wrong with the crowd than be right by ourselves.
The human mind knows how to get along with others. It wants
to get along with others. This is our natural mode. You can override it—you can choose to ignore the group or to stop caring what other people think—but it takes work. Running against the grain of your culture requires extra effort.
When changing your habits means challenging the tribe, change is unattractive. When changing your habits means fitting in with the tribe, change is very attractive.
3. Imitating the Powerful
Humans everywhere pursue power, prestige, and status. We want pins and medallions on our jackets. We want President or Partner in our titles. We want to be acknowledged, recognized, and praised. This tendency can seem vain, but overall, it’s a smart move. Historically, a person with greater power and status has access to more resources, worries less about survival, and proves to be a more attractive mate.
We are drawn to behaviors that earn us respect, approval, admiration, and status. We want to be the one in the gym who can do muscle-ups or the musician who can play the hardest chord progressions or the parent with the most accomplished children because these things separate us from the crowd. Once we fit in, we start looking for ways to stand out.
This is one reason we care so much about the habits of highly effective people. We try to copy the behavior of successful people because we desire success ourselves. Many of our daily habits are imitations of people we admire. You replicate the marketing strategies of the most successful firms in your industry. You make a recipe from your
favorite baker. You borrow the storytelling strategies of your favorite writer. You mimic the communication style of your boss. We imitate people we envy.
High-status people enjoy the approval, respect, and praise of others. And that means if a behavior can get us approval, respect, and praise, we find it attractive.
We are also motivated to avoid behaviors that would lower our status. We trim our hedges and mow our lawn because we don’t want to be the slob of the neighborhood. When our mother comes to visit, we clean up the house because we don’t want to be judged. We are continually wondering “What will others think of me?” and altering our behavior based on the answer.
The Polgar sisters—the chess prodigies mentioned at the beginning of this chapter—are evidence of the powerful and lasting impact social influences can have on our behavior. The sisters practiced chess for many hours each day and continued this remarkable effort for decades. But these habits and behaviors maintained their attractiveness, in part, because they were valued by their culture. From the praise of their parents to the achievement of different status markers like becoming a grandmaster, they had many reasons to continue their effort.
Chapter Summary
The culture we live in determines which behaviors are attractive to us.
We tend to adopt habits that are praised and approved of by our culture because we have a strong desire to fit in and belong to the tribe.
We tend to imitate the habits of three social groups: the close (family and friends), the many (the tribe), and the powerful (those with status and prestige).
One of the most effective things you can do to build better habits is to join a culture where (1) your desired behavior is the normal behavior and (2) you already have something in common with the group.
The normal behavior of the tribe often overpowers the desired behavior of the individual. Most days, we’d rather be wrong with the crowd than be right by ourselves.
If a behavior can get us approval, respect, and praise, we find it
attractive.

10
How to Find and Fix the Causes of Your Bad Habits
IN
LATE
2012
, I was sitting in an old apartment just a few blocks from Istanbul’s most famous street, Istiklal Caddesi. I was in the middle of a four-day trip to Turkey and my guide, Mike, was relaxing in a worn-out armchair a few feet away.
Mike wasn’t really a guide. He was just a guy from Maine who had been living in Turkey for five years, but he offered to show me around while I was visiting the country and I took him up on it. On this particular night, I had been invited to dinner with him and a handful of his Turkish friends.
There were seven of us, and I was the only one who hadn’t, at some point, smoked at least one pack of cigarettes per day. I asked one of the Turks how he got started. “Friends,” he said. “It always starts with your friends. One friend smokes, then you try it.”
What was truly fascinating was that half of the people in the room had managed to quit
smoking. Mike had been smoke-free for a few years at that point, and he swore up and down that he broke the habit because of a book called Allen Carr’s Easy Way to Stop Smoking
.
“It frees you from the mental burden of smoking,” he said. “It tells
you: ‘Stop lying to yourself. You know you don’t actually want to smoke. You know you don’t really enjoy this.’ It helps you feel like you’re not the victim anymore. You start to realize that you don’t need
to smoke.”
I had never tried a cigarette, but I took a look at the book afterward out of curiosity. The author employs an interesting strategy to help smokers eliminate their cravings. He systematically reframes each cue associated with smoking and gives it a new meaning.
He says things like:
You think you are quitting something, but you’re not quitting anything because cigarettes do nothing for you.
You think smoking is something you need to do to be social, but it’s not. You can be social without smoking at all.
You think smoking is about relieving stress, but it’s not. Smoking does not relieve your nerves, it destroys them.
Over and over, he repeats these phrases and others like them. “Get it clearly into your mind,” he says. “You are losing nothing and you are making marvelous positive gains not only in health, energy and money but also in confidence, self-respect, freedom and, most important of all, in the length and quality of your future life.”
By the time you get to the end of the book, smoking seems like the most ridiculous thing in the world to do. And if you no longer expect smoking to bring you any benefits, you have no reason to smoke. It is an inversion of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change: make it unattractive
.
Now, I know this idea might sound overly simplistic. Just change your mind and you can quit smoking. But stick with me for a minute.
WHERE CRAVINGS COME FROM
Every behavior has a surface level craving and a deeper, underlying motive. I often have a craving that goes something like this: “I want to eat tacos.” If you were to ask me why I want to eat tacos,
I wouldn’t say, “Because I need food to survive.” But the truth is, somewhere deep down, I am motivated to eat tacos because I have to eat to survive. The underlying motive is to obtain food and water even if my specific craving is for a taco.
Some of our underlying motives include:
*
Conserve energy
Obtain food and water
Find love and reproduce
Connect and bond with others
Win social acceptance and approval
Reduce uncertainty
Achieve status and prestige
A craving is just a specific manifestation of a deeper underlying motive. Your brain did not evolve with a desire to smoke cigarettes or to check Instagram or to play video games. At a deep level, you simply want to reduce uncertainty and relieve anxiety, to win social acceptance and approval, or to achieve status.
Look at nearly any product that is habit-forming and you’ll see that it does not create a new motivation, but rather latches onto the underlying motives of human nature.
Find love and reproduce = using Tinder
Connect and bond with others = browsing Facebook
Win social acceptance and approval = posting on Instagram
Reduce uncertainty = searching on Google
Achieve status and prestige = playing video games
Your habits are modern-day solutions to ancient desires. New versions of old vices. The underlying motives behind human behavior remain the same. The specific habits we perform differ based on the period of history.
Here’s the powerful part: there are many different ways to address the same underlying motive. One person might learn to reduce stress by smoking a cigarette. Another person learns to ease their anxiety by going for a run. Your current habits are not necessarily the best way to solve the problems you face; they are just the methods you learned to use. Once you associate a solution with the problem you need to solve, you keep coming back to it.
Habits are all about associations. These associations determine whether we predict a habit to be worth repeating or not. As we covered in our discussion of the 1st Law, your brain is continually absorbing information and noticing cues in the environment. Every time you perceive a cue, your brain runs a simulation and makes a prediction about what to do in the next moment.
Cue: You notice that the stove is hot.
Prediction: If I touch it I’ll get burned, so I should avoid touching it.
Cue: You see that the traffic light turned green.
Prediction: If I step on the gas, I’ll make it safely through the intersection and get closer to my destination, so I should step on the gas.
You see a cue, categorize it based on past experience, and determine the appropriate response.
This all happens in an instant, but it plays a crucial role in your habits because every action is preceded by a prediction. Life feels reactive, but it is actually predictive. All day long, you are making your best guess of how to act given what you’ve just seen and what has worked for you in the past. You are endlessly predicting what will happen in the next moment.
Our behavior is heavily dependent on these predictions. Put another way, our behavior is heavily dependent on how we interpret the events that happen to us, not necessarily the objective reality of the events themselves. Two people can look at the same cigarette, and one feels the urge to smoke while the other is repulsed by the smell. The same cue can spark a good habit or a bad habit depending on your prediction. The cause of your habits is actually the prediction that precedes them.
These predictions lead to feelings, which is how we typically describe a craving—a feeling, a desire, an urge. Feelings and emotions transform the cues we perceive and the predictions we make into a signal that we can apply. They help explain what we are currently sensing. For instance, whether or not you realize it, you are noticing how warm or cold you feel right now. If the temperature drops by one degree, you probably won’t do anything. If the temperature drops ten degrees, however, you’ll feel cold and put on another layer of clothing. Feeling cold was the signal that prompted you to act. You have been sensing the cues the entire time, but it is only when you predict that you would be better off in a different state that you take action.
A craving is the sense that something is missing. It is the desire to change your internal state. When the temperature falls, there is a gap between what your body is currently sensing and what it wants
to be sensing. This gap between your current state and your desired state provides a reason to act.
Desire is the difference between where you are now and where you
want to be in the future. Even the tiniest action is tinged with the motivation to feel differently than you do in the moment. When you binge-eat or light up or browse social media, what you really want is not
a potato chip or a cigarette or a bunch of likes. What you really want is to feel
different.
Our feelings and emotions tell us whether to hold steady in our current state or to make a change. They help us decide the best course of action. Neurologists have discovered that
when emotions and feelings are impaired, we actually lose the ability to make decisions. We have no signal of what to pursue and what to avoid.
As the neuroscientist Antonio Damasio explains, “It is emotion that allows you to mark things as good, bad, or indifferent.”
To summarize, the specific cravings you feel and habits you perform are really an attempt to address your fundamental underlying motives. Whenever a habit successfully addresses a motive, you develop a craving to do it again. In time, you learn to predict that checking social media will help you feel loved or that watching YouTube will allow you to forget your fears. Habits are attractive when we associate them with positive feelings, and we can use this insight to our advantage rather than to our detriment.
HOW TO REPROGRAM YOUR BRAIN TO ENJOY HARD HABITS
You can make hard habits more attractive if you can learn to associate them with a positive experience. Sometimes, all you need is a slight mind-set shift. For instance, we often talk about everything we have to do in a given day. You have to wake up early for work. You have to make another sales call for your business. You have to cook dinner for your family.
Now, imagine changing just one word:
You don’t “have” to. You “get” to.
You get
to wake up early for work. You get
to make another sales call for your business. You get
to cook dinner for your family. By simply changing one word, you shift the way you view each event. You transition from seeing these behaviors as burdens and turn them into opportunities.
The key point is that both versions of reality are true. You have
to do those things, and you also get
to do them. We can find evidence for whatever mind-set we choose.
I once heard a story about a man who uses a wheelchair. When asked if it was difficult being confined, he responded, “
I’m not confined to my wheelchair—I am liberated by it. If it wasn’t for my wheelchair, I would be bed-bound and never able to leave my house.” This shift in perspective completely transformed how he lived each day.
Reframing your habits to highlight their benefits
rather than their drawbacks is a fast and lightweight way to reprogram your mind and make a habit seem more attractive.
Exercise.
Many people associate exercise with being a challenging task that drains energy and wears you down. You can just as easily view it as a way to develop skills and build you up. Instead of telling yourself “I need to go run in the morning,” say “
It’s time to build endurance and get fast.”
Finance.
Saving money is often associated with sacrifice. However, you can associate it with freedom rather than limitation if you realize one simple truth: living below your current means increases
your future means. The money you save this month increases your purchasing power next month.
Meditation.
Anyone who has tried meditation for more than three seconds knows how frustrating it can be when the next distraction
inevitably pops into your mind. You can transform frustration into delight when you realize that each interruption gives you a chance to practice returning to your breath. Distraction is a good thing because you need distractions to practice meditation.
Pregame jitters.
Many people feel anxious before delivering a big presentation or competing in an important event. They experience quicker breathing, a faster heart rate, heightened arousal. If we interpret these feelings negatively, then we feel threatened and tense up. If we interpret these feelings positively, then we can respond with fluidity and grace. You can reframe “I am nervous” to “I am excited and
I’m getting an adrenaline rush to help me concentrate.”
These little mind-set shifts aren’t magic, but they can help change the feelings you associate with a particular habit or situation.
If you want to take it a step further, you can create a motivation ritual
. You simply practice associating your habits with something you enjoy, then you can use that cue whenever you need a bit of motivation. For instance, if you always play the same song before having sex, then you’ll begin to link the music with the act. Whenever you want to get in the mood, just press play.
Ed Latimore, a boxer and writer from Pittsburgh, benefited from a similar strategy without knowing it. “Odd realization,” he wrote. “My focus and concentration goes up just by putting my headphones [on] while writing. I don’t even have to play any music.” Without realizing it, he was conditioning himself. In the beginning, he put his headphones on, played some music he enjoyed, and did focused work. After doing it five, ten, twenty times, putting his headphones on became a cue that he automatically associated with increased focus. The craving followed naturally.
Athletes use similar strategies to get themselves in the mind-set to perform. During my baseball career, I developed a specific ritual of stretching and throwing before each game. The whole sequence took about ten minutes, and I did it the same way every single time. While
it physically warmed me up to play, more importantly, it put me in the right mental state. I began to associate my pregame ritual with feeling competitive and focused. Even if I wasn’t motivated beforehand, by the time I was done with my ritual, I was in “game mode.”
You can adapt this strategy for nearly any purpose. Say you want to feel happier in general. Find something that makes you truly happy—like petting your dog or taking a bubble bath—and then create a short routine that you perform every time before
you do the thing you love. Maybe you take three deep breaths and smile.
Three deep breaths. Smile. Pet the dog. Repeat.
Eventually, you’ll begin to associate this breathe-and-smile routine with being in a good mood. It becomes a cue that means
feeling happy. Once established, you can break it out anytime you need to change your emotional state. Stressed at work? Take three deep breaths and smile. Sad about life? Three deep breaths and smile. Once a habit has been built, the cue can prompt a craving, even if it has little to do with the original situation.
The key to finding and fixing the causes of your bad habits is to reframe the associations you have about them. It’s not easy, but if you can reprogram your predictions, you can transform a hard habit into an attractive one.
Chapter Summary
The inversion of the 2nd Law of Behavior Change is make it unattractive
.
Every behavior has a surface level craving and a deeper underlying motive.
Your habits are modern-day solutions to ancient desires.
The cause of your habits is actually the prediction that precedes them. The prediction leads to a feeling.
Highlight the benefits of avoiding a bad habit to make it seem unattractive.
Habits are attractive when we associate them with positive feelings and unattractive when we associate them with negative feelings. Create a motivation ritual by doing something you enjoy immediately before a difficult
habit.
HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT
The 1st Law: Make It Obvious
1.1:
Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them.
1.2:
Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].”
1.3:
Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
1.4:
Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible.
The 2nd Law: Make It Attractive
2.1:
Use temptation bundling. Pair an action you want
to do with an action you need
to do.
2.2:
Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior.
2.3:
Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit.
The 3rd Law: Make It Easy
The 4th Law: Make It Satisfying
HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT
Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible
1.5:
Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment.
Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive
2.4:
Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits.
Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult
Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying
You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet

THE 3RD LAW
Make It
Easy

11
Walk Slowly, but Never Backward
ON THE FIRST
day of class, Jerry Uelsmann, a professor at the University of Florida, divided his film photography students into two groups.
Everyone on the left side of the classroom, he explained, would be in the “quantity” group. They would be graded solely on the amount of work they produced. On the final day of class, he would tally the number of photos submitted by each student. One hundred photos would rate an A, ninety photos a B, eighty photos a C, and so on.
Meanwhile, everyone on the right side of the room would be in the “quality” group. They would be graded only on the excellence of their work. They would only need to produce one photo during the semester, but to get an A, it had to be a nearly perfect image.
At the end of the term, he was surprised to find that all the best photos were produced by the quantity
group. During the semester, these students were busy taking photos, experimenting with composition and lighting, testing out various methods in the darkroom, and learning from their mistakes. In the process of creating hundreds of photos, they honed their skills. Meanwhile, the quality
group sat
around speculating about perfection.
In the end, they had little to show for their efforts other than unverified theories and one mediocre photo.
*
It is easy to get bogged down trying to find the optimal plan for change: the fastest way to lose weight, the best program to build muscle, the perfect idea for a side hustle. We are so focused on figuring out the best approach that we never get around to taking action.
As Voltaire once wrote, “The best is the enemy of the good.”
I refer to this as the difference between being in motion and taking action. The two ideas sound similar, but they’re not the same. When you’re in motion, you’re planning and strategizing and learning. Those are all good things, but they don’t produce a result.
Action, on the other hand, is the type of behavior that will deliver an outcome. If I outline twenty ideas for articles I want to write, that’s motion. If I actually sit down and write an article, that’s action. If I search for a better diet plan and read a few books on the topic, that’s motion. If I actually eat a healthy meal, that’s action.
Sometimes motion is useful, but it will never produce an outcome by itself. It doesn’t matter how many times you go talk to the personal trainer, that motion will never get you in shape. Only the action of working out will get the result you’re looking to achieve.
If motion doesn’t lead to results, why do we do it? Sometimes we do it because we actually need to plan or learn more. But more often than not, we do it because motion allows us to feel like we’re making progress without running the risk of failure. Most of us are experts at avoiding criticism. It doesn’t feel good to fail or to be judged publicly, so we tend to avoid situations where that might happen. And that’s the biggest reason why you slip into motion rather than taking action: you want to delay failure.
It’s easy to be in motion and convince yourself that you’re still making progress. You think, “I’ve got conversations going with four potential clients right now. This is good. We’re moving in the right direction.”
Or, “I brainstormed some ideas for that book I want to write. This is coming together.”
Motion makes you feel like you’re getting things done. But really, you’re just preparing to get something done. When preparation becomes a form of procrastination, you need to change something. You don’t want to merely be planning. You want to be practicing.
If you want to master a habit, the key is to start with repetition, not perfection. You don’t need to map out every feature of a new habit. You just need to practice it. This is the first takeaway of the 3rd Law: you just need to get your reps in.
HOW LONG DOES IT ACTUALLY TAKE TO FORM A NEW HABIT?
Habit formation is the process by which a behavior becomes progressively more automatic through repetition. The more you repeat an activity, the more the structure of your brain changes to become efficient at that activity. Neuroscientists call this
long-term potentiation
, which refers to the strengthening of connections between neurons in the brain based on recent patterns of activity. With each repetition, cell-to-cell signaling improves and the neural connections tighten. First described by neuropsychologist Donald Hebb in 1949, this phenomenon is commonly known as Hebb’s Law: “
Neurons that fire together wire together.”
Repeating a habit leads to clear physical changes in the brain.
In musicians, the cerebellum—critical for physical movements like plucking a guitar string or pulling a violin bow—is larger than it is in nonmusicians.
Mathematicians, meanwhile, have increased gray matter in
the inferior parietal lobule, which plays a key role in computation and calculation. Its size is directly correlated with the amount of time spent in the field; the older and more experienced the mathematician, the greater the increase in gray matter.
When scientists analyzed the brains of taxi drivers in London, they found that the hippocampus—a region of the brain involved in spatial memory—was significantly larger in their subjects than in non–taxi drivers. Even more fascinating, the hippocampus decreased in size when a driver retired. Like the muscles of the body responding to regular weight training, particular regions of the brain adapt as they are used and atrophy as they are abandoned.
Of course, the importance of repetition in establishing habits was recognized long before neuroscientists began poking around. In 1860, the English philosopher George H. Lewes noted, “In learning to speak a new language, to play on a musical instrument, or to perform unaccustomed movements, great difficulty is felt, because the channels through which each sensation has to pass have not become established; but no sooner has frequent repetition cut a pathway, than this difficulty vanishes;
the actions become so automatic that they can be performed while the mind is otherwise engaged.” Both common sense and scientific evidence agree:
repetition is a form of change.
Each time you repeat an action, you are activating a particular neural circuit associated with that habit. This means that simply putting in your reps is one of the most critical steps you can take to encoding a new habit. It is why the students who took tons of photos improved their skills while those who merely theorized about perfect photos did not. One group engaged in active practice, the other in passive learning. One in action, the other in motion.
All habits follow a similar trajectory from effortful practice to automatic behavior, a process known as automaticity
.
Automaticity is the ability to perform a behavior without thinking about each step, which occurs when the nonconscious mind takes over.
It looks something like this:
THE HABIT LINE
FIGURE 11:
In the beginning (point A), a habit requires a good deal of effort and concentration to perform. After a few repetitions (point B), it gets easier, but still requires some conscious attention. With enough practice (point C), the habit becomes more automatic than conscious. Beyond this threshold—the habit line
—the behavior can be done more or less without thinking. A new habit has been formed.
On the following page, you’ll see what it looks like when researchers track the level of automaticity for an actual habit like walking for ten minutes each day. The shape of these charts, which scientists call learning curves
, reveals an important truth about behavior change:
habits form based on frequency, not time.
WALKING 10 MINUTES PER DAY
FIGURE 12:
This graph shows someone who built the habit of walking for ten minutes after breakfast each day. Notice that as the repetitions increase, so does automaticity, until the behavior is as easy and automatic as it can be.
One of the most common questions I hear is, “How long
does it take to build a new habit?” But what people really should be asking is, “How many
does it take to form a new habit?” That is, how many repetitions are required to make a habit automatic?
There is nothing magical about time passing with regard to habit formation. It doesn’t matter if it’s been twenty-one days or thirty days or three hundred days. What matters is the rate at which you perform the behavior. You could do something twice in thirty days, or two hundred times. It’s the frequency that makes the difference. Your current habits have been internalized over the course of hundreds, if not thousands, of repetitions. New habits require the same level of
frequency. You need to string together enough successful attempts until the behavior is firmly embedded in your mind and you cross the Habit Line.
In practice, it doesn’t really matter how long it takes for a habit to become automatic. What matters is that you take the actions you need to take to make progress. Whether an action is fully automatic is of less importance.
To build a habit, you need to practice it. And the most effective way to make practice happen is to adhere to the 3rd Law of Behavior Change: make it easy
. The chapters that follow will show you how to do exactly that.
Chapter Summary
The 3rd Law of Behavior Change is make it easy
.
The most effective form of learning is practice, not planning.
Focus on taking action, not being in motion.
Habit formation is the process by which a behavior becomes progressively more automatic through repetition.
The amount of time you have been performing a habit is not as important as the number of times you have performed
it.

12
The Law of Least Effort
IN HIS AWARD
-WINNING
BOOK
,
Guns, Germs, and Steel
, anthropologist and biologist Jared Diamond points out a simple fact: different continents have different shapes. At first glance, this statement seems rather obvious and unimportant, but it turns out to have a profound impact on human behavior.
The primary axis of the Americas runs from north to south. That is, the landmass of North and South America tends to be tall and thin rather than wide and fat. The same is generally true for Africa. Meanwhile, the landmass that makes up Europe, Asia, and the Middle East is the opposite. This massive stretch of land tends to be more east-west in shape. According to Diamond,
this difference in shape played a significant role in the spread of agriculture over the centuries.
When agriculture began to spread around the globe, farmers had an easier time expanding along east-west routes than along north-south ones. This is because locations along the same latitude generally share similar climates, amounts of sunlight and rainfall, and changes in season. These factors allowed farmers in Europe and Asia to domesticate a few crops and grow them along the entire stretch of land from France to China.
THE SHAPE OF HUMAN BEHAVIOR
FIGURE 13:
The primary axis of Europe and Asia is east-west. The primary axis of the Americas and Africa is north-south. This leads to a wider range of climates up-and-down the Americas than across Europe and Asia. As a result, agriculture spread nearly twice as fast across Europe and Asia than it did elsewhere. The behavior of farmers—even across hundreds or thousands of years—was constrained by the amount of friction in the environment.
By comparison, the climate varies greatly when traveling from north to south. Just imagine how different the weather is in Florida compared to Canada. You can be the most talented farmer in the world, but it won’t help you grow Florida oranges in the Canadian
winter. Snow is a poor substitute for soil. In order to spread crops along north-south routes, farmers would need to find and domesticate new plants whenever the climate changed.
As a result, agriculture spread two to three times faster across Asia and Europe than it did up and down the Americas. Over the span of centuries, this small difference had a very big impact. Increased food production allowed for more rapid population growth. With more people, these cultures were able to build stronger armies and were better equipped to develop new technologies. The changes started out small—a crop that spread slightly farther, a population that grew slightly faster—but compounded into substantial differences over time.
The spread of agriculture provides an example of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change on a global scale. Conventional wisdom holds that motivation is the key to habit change. Maybe if you really
wanted it, you’d actually do it. But the truth is, our real motivation is to be lazy and to do what is convenient. And despite what the latest productivity best seller will tell you, this is a smart strategy, not a dumb one.
Energy is precious, and the brain is wired to conserve it whenever possible.
It is human nature to follow the Law of Least Effort, which states that when deciding between two similar options, people will naturally gravitate toward the option that requires the least amount of work.
*
For example, expanding your farm to the east where you can grow the same crops rather than heading north where the climate is different. Out of all the possible actions we could take, the one that is realized is the one that delivers the most value for the least effort. We are motivated to do what is easy.
Every action requires a certain amount of energy. The more energy required, the less likely it is to occur. If your goal is to do a hundred push-ups per day, that’s a lot of energy! In the beginning, when you’re motivated and excited, you can muster the strength to get started. But after a few days, such a massive effort feels exhausting. Meanwhile, sticking to the habit of doing one push-up per day requires almost no energy to get started. And the less energy a habit requires, the more likely it is to occur.
Look at any behavior that fills up much of your life and you’ll see that it can be performed with very low levels of motivation. Habits like scrolling on our phones, checking email, and watching television steal so much of our time because they can be performed almost without effort. They are remarkably convenient.
In a sense, every habit is just an obstacle to getting what you really want. Dieting is an obstacle to getting fit. Meditation is an obstacle to feeling calm. Journaling is an obstacle to thinking clearly. You don’t actually want the habit itself. What you really want is the outcome the habit delivers. The greater the obstacle—that is, the more difficult the habit—the more friction there is between you and your desired end state. This is why it is crucial to make your habits so easy that you’ll do them even when you don’t feel like it. If you can make your good habits more convenient, you’ll be more likely to follow through on them.
But what about all the moments when we seem to do the opposite? If we’re all so lazy, then how do you explain people accomplishing hard things like raising a child or starting a business or climbing Mount Everest?
Certainly, you are capable of doing very hard things. The problem is that some days you feel like doing the hard work and some days you feel like giving in. On the tough days, it’s crucial to have as many things working in your favor as possible so that you can overcome the challenges life naturally throws your way. The less friction you face, the
easier it is for your stronger self to emerge. The idea behind make it easy
is not to only
do easy things. The idea is to make it as easy as possible in the moment to do things that payoff in the long run.
HOW TO ACHIEVE MORE WITH LESS EFFORT
Imagine you are holding
a garden hose that is bent in the middle. Some water can flow through, but not very much. If you want to increase the rate at which water passes through the hose, you have two options. The first option is to crank up the valve and force more water out. The second option is to simply remove the bend in the hose and let water flow through naturally.
Trying to pump up your motivation to stick with a hard habit is like trying to force water through a bent hose. You can do it, but it requires a lot of effort and increases the tension in your life. Meanwhile, making your habits simple and easy is like removing the bend in the hose. Rather than trying to overcome the friction in your life, you reduce it.
One of the most effective ways to reduce the friction associated with your habits is to practice environment design. In Chapter 6, we discussed environment design as a method for making cues more obvious, but you can also optimize your environment to make actions easier. For example, when deciding where to practice a new habit, it is best to choose a place that is already along the path of your daily routine. Habits are easier to build when they fit into the flow of your life. You are more likely to go to the gym if it is on your way to work because stopping doesn’t add much friction to your lifestyle. By comparison, if the gym is off the path of your normal commute—even by just a few blocks—now you’re going “out of your way” to get there.
Perhaps even more effective is reducing the friction within your home or office. Too often, we try to start habits in high-friction environments. We try to follow a strict diet while we are out to dinner with
friends. We try to write a book in a chaotic household. We try to concentrate while using a smartphone filled with distractions. It doesn’t have to be this way. We can remove the points of friction that hold us back. This is precisely what electronics manufacturers in Japan began to do in the 1970s.
In an article published in the New Yorker
titled “Better All the Time,” James Suroweicki writes:
“Japanese firms emphasized what came to be known as ‘lean production,’ relentlessly looking to remove waste of all kinds from the production process, down to redesigning workspaces, so workers didn’t have to waste time twisting and turning to reach their tools. The result was that Japanese factories were more efficient and Japanese products were more reliable than American ones. In 1974, service calls for American-made color televisions were five times as common as for Japanese televisions. By 1979,
it took American workers three times as long to assemble their sets.”
I like to refer to this strategy as
addition by subtraction
.
*
The Japanese companies looked for every point of friction in the manufacturing process and eliminated it. As they subtracted wasted effort, they added customers and revenue. Similarly, when we remove the points of friction that sap our time and energy, we can achieve more with less effort. (This is one reason tidying up can feel so good: we are simultaneously moving forward and lightening the cognitive load our environment places on us.)
If you look at the most habit-forming products, you’ll notice that one of the things these goods and services do best is remove little bits of friction from your life. Meal delivery services reduce the friction of shopping for groceries. Dating apps reduce the friction of making
social introductions. Ride-sharing services reduce the friction of getting across town. Text messaging reduces the friction of sending a letter in the mail.
Like a Japanese television manufacturer redesigning their workspace to reduce wasted motion, successful companies design their products to automate, eliminate, or simplify as many steps as possible. They reduce the number of fields on each form. They pare down the number of clicks required to create an account. They deliver their products with easy-to-understand directions or ask their customers to make fewer choices.
When the first voice-activated speakers were released—products like Google Home, Amazon Echo, and Apple HomePod—I asked a friend what he liked about the product he had purchased. He said it was just easier to say “Play some country music” than to pull out his phone, open the music app, and pick a playlist. Of course, just a few years earlier, having unlimited access to music in your pocket was a remarkably frictionless behavior compared to driving to the store and buying a CD. Business is a never-ending quest to deliver the same result in an easier fashion.
Similar strategies have been used effectively by governments. When the British government wanted to increase tax collection rates, they switched from sending citizens to a web page where the tax form could be downloaded to linking directly to the form. Reducing that one step in the process increased the response rate from 19.2 percent to 23.4 percent. For a country like the United Kingdom,
those percentage points represent millions in tax revenue.
The central idea is to create an environment where doing the right thing is as easy as possible. Much of the battle of building better habits comes down to finding ways to reduce the friction associated with our good habits and increase the friction associated with our bad ones.
PRIME THE ENVIRONMENT FOR FUTURE USE
Oswald Nuckols is an IT developer from Natchez, Mississippi. He is also someone who understands the power of priming his environment.
Nuckols dialed in his cleaning habits by following a strategy he refers to as “resetting the room.” For instance, when he finishes watching television, he places the remote back on the TV stand, arranges the pillows on the couch, and folds the blanket. When he leaves his car, he throws any trash away. Whenever he takes a shower, he wipes down the toilet while the shower is warming up. (As he notes, the “
perfect time to clean the toilet is right before you wash yourself in the shower anyway.”) The purpose of resetting each room is not simply to clean up after the last action, but to prepare for the next action.
“When I walk into a room everything is in its right place,” Nuckols wrote. “Because I do this every day in every room, stuff always stays in good shape. . . . People think I work hard but I’m actually really lazy. I’m just proactively lazy. It gives you so much time back.”
Whenever you organize a space for its intended purpose, you are priming it to make the next action easy. For instance, my wife keeps a box of greeting cards that are presorted by occasion—birthday, sympathy, wedding, graduation, and more. Whenever necessary, she grabs an appropriate card and sends it off. She is incredibly good at remembering to send cards because she has reduced the friction of doing so. For years, I was the opposite. Someone would have a baby and I would think, “I should send a card.” But then weeks would pass and by the time I remembered to pick one up at the store, it was too late. The habit wasn’t easy.
There are many ways to prime your environment so it’s ready for immediate use. If you want to cook a healthy breakfast, place the skillet on the stove, set the cooking spray on the counter, and lay out any plates and utensils you’ll need the night before. When you wake up, making breakfast will be easy.
Want to draw more? Put your pencils, pens, notebooks, and drawing tools on top of your desk, within easy reach.
Want to exercise? Set out your workout clothes, shoes, gym bag, and water bottle ahead of time.
Want to improve your diet? Chop up a ton of fruits and vegetables on weekends and pack them in containers, so you have easy access to healthy, ready-to-eat options during the week.
These are simple ways to make the good habit the path of least resistance.
You can also invert this principle and prime the environment to make bad behaviors difficult. If you find yourself watching too much television, for example, then unplug it after each use. Only plug it back in if you can say out loud the name of the show you want to watch. This setup creates just enough friction to prevent mindless viewing.
If that doesn’t do it, you can take it a step further. Unplug the television and take the batteries out of the remote after each use, so it takes an extra ten seconds to turn it back on. And if you’re really hard-core, move the television out of the living room and into a closet after each use. You can be sure you’ll only take it out when you really
want to watch something. The greater the friction, the less likely the habit.
Whenever possible, I leave my phone in a different room until lunch. When it’s right next to me, I’ll check it all morning for no reason at all. But when it is in another room, I rarely think about it. And the friction is high enough that I won’t go get it without a reason. As a result, I get three to four hours each morning when I can work without interruption.
If sticking your phone in another room doesn’t seem like enough, tell a friend or family member to hide it from you for a few hours. Ask a coworker to keep it at their desk in the morning and give it back to you at lunch.
It is remarkable how little friction is required to prevent unwanted behavior. When I hide beer in the back of the fridge where I can’t see it, I drink less. When I delete social media apps from my phone, it can be weeks before I download them again and log in. These tricks are unlikely to curb a true addiction, but for many of us, a little bit of friction can be the difference between sticking with a good habit or sliding into a bad one. Imagine the cumulative impact of making dozens of these changes and living in an environment designed to make the good behaviors easier and the bad behaviors harder.
Whether we are approaching behavior change as an individual, a parent, a coach, or a leader, we should ask ourselves the same question: “How can we design a world where it’s easy to do what’s right?” Redesign your life so the actions that matter most are also the actions that are easiest to do.
Chapter Summary
Human behavior follows the Law of Least Effort. We will naturally gravitate toward the option that requires the least amount of work.
Create an environment where doing the right thing is as easy as possible.
Reduce the friction associated with good behaviors. When friction is low, habits are easy.
Increase the friction associated with bad behaviors. When friction is high, habits are difficult.
Prime your environment to make future actions easier.

13
How to Stop Procrastinating by Using the Two-Minute Rule
TWYLA
THARP
IS
widely regarded as one of the greatest dancers and choreographers of the modern era. In 1992, she was awarded a MacArthur Fellowship, often referred to as the Genius Grant, and she has spent the bulk of her career touring the globe to perform her original works. She also credits much of her success to simple daily habits.
“I begin each day of my life with a ritual,” she writes. “I wake up at 5:30 A.M., put on my workout clothes, my leg warmers, my sweat shirt, and my hat. I walk outside my Manhattan home, hail a taxi, and tell the driver to take me to the Pumping Iron gym at 91st Street and First Avenue, where I work out for two hours.
“The ritual is not the stretching and weight training I put my body through each morning at the gym; the ritual is the cab. The moment I tell the driver where to go I have completed the ritual.
“It’s a simple act, but doing it the same way each morning habitualizes it—makes it repeatable, easy to do. It reduces the chance that I would skip it or do it differently. It is one more item in my
arsenal of routines, and one less thing to think about.”
Hailing a cab each morning may be a tiny action, but it is a splendid example of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change.
Researchers estimate that
40 to 50 percent of our actions on any given day are done out of habit. This is already a substantial percentage, but the true influence of your habits is even greater than these numbers suggest. Habits are automatic choices that influence the conscious decisions that follow. Yes, a habit can be completed in just a few seconds, but it can also shape the actions that you take for minutes or hours afterward.
Habits are like the entrance ramp to a highway. They lead you down a path and, before you know it, you’re speeding toward the next behavior. It seems to be easier to continue what you are already doing than to start doing something different. You sit through a bad movie for two hours. You keep snacking even when you’re already full. You check your phone for “just a second” and soon you have spent twenty minutes staring at the screen. In this way, the
habits you follow without thinking often determine the choices you make when you are thinking.
Each evening, there is a tiny moment—usually around 5:15 p.m.—that shapes the rest of my night. My wife walks in the door from work and either we change into our workout clothes and head to the gym or we crash onto the couch, order Indian food, and watch The Office
.
*
Similar to Twyla Tharp hailing the cab, the ritual is changing into my workout clothes. If I change clothes, I know the workout will happen. Everything that follows—driving to the gym, deciding which exercises to do, stepping under the bar—is easy once I’ve taken the first step.
Every day, there are a handful of moments that deliver an outsized impact. I refer to these little choices as
decisive moments
. The moment you decide between ordering takeout or cooking dinner. The moment you choose between driving your car or riding your bike. The moment you decide between starting your homework or grabbing the video game controller. These choices are a fork in the road.
DECISIVE MOMENTS
FIGURE 14:
The difference between a good day and a bad day is often a few productive and healthy choices made at decisive moments. Each one is like a fork in the road, and these choices stack up throughout the day and can ultimately lead to very different outcomes.
Decisive moments set the options available to your future self. For
instance, walking into a restaurant is a decisive moment because it determines what you’ll be eating for lunch. Technically, you are in control of what you order, but in a larger sense, you can only order an item if it is on the menu. If you walk into a steakhouse, you can get a sirloin or a rib eye, but not sushi. Your options are constrained by what’s available. They are shaped by the first choice.
We are limited by where our habits lead us. This is why mastering the decisive moments throughout your day is so important. Each day is made up of many moments, but it is really a few habitual choices that determine the path you take. These little choices stack up, each one setting the trajectory for how you spend the next chunk of time.
Habits are the entry point, not the end point. They are the cab, not the gym.
THE TWO-MINUTE RULE
Even when you know you should start small, it’s easy to start too big. When you dream about making a change, excitement inevitably takes over and you end up trying to do too much too soon. The most effective way I know to counteract this tendency is to use the Two-Minute Rule
, which states, “When you start a new habit, it should take less than two minutes to do.”
You’ll find that nearly any habit can be scaled down into a two-minute version:
“Read before bed each night” becomes “Read one page.”
“Do thirty minutes of yoga” becomes “Take out my yoga mat.”
“Study for class” becomes “Open my notes.”
“Fold the laundry” becomes “Fold one pair of socks.”
“Run three miles” becomes “Tie my running shoes.”
The idea is to make your habits as easy as possible to start. Anyone can meditate for one minute, read one page, or put one item of clothing away. And, as we have just discussed, this is a powerful strategy because once you’ve started doing the right thing, it is much easier to continue doing it. A new habit should not feel like a challenge. The actions that follow
can be challenging, but the first two minutes should be easy. What you want is a “gateway habit” that naturally leads you down a more productive path.
You can usually figure out the gateway habits that will lead to your desired outcome by mapping out your goals on a scale from “very easy” to “very hard.” For instance, running a marathon is very hard. Running a 5K is hard. Walking ten thousand steps is moderately difficult. Walking ten minutes is easy. And putting on your running shoes is very easy. Your goal might be to run a marathon, but your gateway habit is to put on your running shoes. That’s how you follow the Two-Minute Rule.
Very easy
Easy
Moderate
Hard
Very hard
Put on your running shoes
Walk ten minutes
Walk ten thousand steps
Run a 5K
Run a marathon
Write one sentence
Write one paragraph
Write one thousand words
Write a five-thousand-word article
Write a book
Open your notes
Study for ten minutes
Study for three hours
Get straight A’s
Earn a PhD
People often think it’s weird to get hyped about reading one page or meditating for one minute or making one sales call. But the point is not to do one thing. The point is to master the habit of showing up. The truth is, a habit must be established before it can be improved. If you
can’t learn the basic skill of showing up, then you have little hope of mastering the finer details. Instead of trying to engineer a perfect habit from the start, do the easy thing on a more consistent basis. You have to standardize before you can optimize.
As you master the art of showing up, the first two minutes simply become a ritual at the beginning of a larger routine. This is not merely a hack to make habits easier but actually the ideal way to master a difficult skill. The more you ritualize the beginning of a process, the more likely it becomes that you can slip into the state of deep focus that is required to do great things. By doing the same warm-up before every workout, you make it easier to get into a state of peak performance. By following the same creative ritual, you make it easier to get into the hard work of creating. By developing a consistent
power-down habit, you make it easier to get to bed at a reasonable time each night. You may not be able to automate the whole process, but you can make the first action mindless. Make it easy to start and the rest will follow.
The Two-Minute Rule can seem like a trick to some people. You know that the real
goal is to do more than just two minutes, so it may feel like you’re trying to fool yourself. Nobody is actually aspiring to read one page or do one push-up or open their notes. And if you know it’s a mental trick, why would you fall for it?
If the Two-Minute Rule feels forced, try this: do it for two minutes and then stop. Go for a run, but you must
stop after two minutes. Start meditating, but you must
stop after two minutes. Study Arabic, but you must
stop after two minutes. It’s not a strategy for starting, it’s the whole thing. Your habit can only
last one hundred and twenty seconds.
One of my readers used this strategy to lose over one hundred pounds. In the beginning, he went to the gym each day, but he told himself he wasn’t allowed to stay for more than five minutes. He would go to the gym, exercise for five minutes, and leave as soon as his time was up. After a few weeks, he looked around and thought, “Well, I’m
always coming here anyway. I might as well start staying a little longer.” A few years later, the weight was gone.
Journaling provides another example. Nearly everyone can benefit from getting their thoughts out of their head and onto paper, but most people give up after a few days or avoid it entirely because journaling feels like a chore.
*
The secret is to always stay below the point where it feels like work. Greg McKeown, a leadership consultant from the United Kingdom, built a daily journaling habit by specifically writing less
than he felt like.
He always stopped journaling before it seemed like a hassle. Ernest Hemingway believed in similar advice for any kind of writing. “The best way is to always stop when you are going good,” he said.
Strategies like this work for another reason, too: they reinforce the identity you want to build. If you show up at the gym five days in a row—even if it’s just for two minutes—you are casting votes for your new identity. You’re not worried about getting in shape. You’re focused on becoming the type of person who doesn’t miss workouts. You’re taking the smallest action that confirms the type of person you want to be.
We rarely think about change this way because everyone is consumed by the end goal. But one push-up is better than not exercising. One minute of guitar practice is better than none at all. One minute of reading is better than never picking up a book. It’s better to do less than you hoped than to do nothing at all.
At some point, once you’ve established the habit and you’re showing up each day, you can combine the Two-Minute Rule with a technique we call
habit shaping
to scale your habit back up toward your ultimate goal. Start by mastering the first two minutes of the smallest version of
the behavior. Then, advance to an intermediate step and repeat the process—focusing on just the first two minutes and mastering that stage before moving on to the next level. Eventually, you’ll end up with the habit you had originally hoped to build while still keeping your focus where it should be: on the first two minutes of the behavior.
EXAMPLES OF HABIT SHAPING
Becoming an Early Riser
Phase 1:
Be home by 10 p.m. every night.
Phase 2:
Have all devices (TV, phone, etc.) turned off by 10 p.m. every night.
Phase 3:
Be in bed by 10 p.m. every night (reading a book, talking with your partner).
Phase 4:
Lights off by 10 p.m. every night.
Phase 5:
Wake up at 6 a.m. every day.
Becoming Vegan
Phase 1:
Start eating vegetables at each meal.
Phase 2:
Stop eating animals with four legs (cow, pig, lamb, etc.).
Phase 3:
Stop eating animals with two legs (chicken, turkey, etc.).
Phase 4:
Stop eating animals with no legs (fish, clams, scallops, etc.).
Phase 5:
Stop eating all animal products (eggs, milk, cheese).
Starting to Exercise
Phase 1:
Change into workout clothes.
Phase 2:
Step out the door (try taking a walk).
Phase 3:
Drive to the gym, exercise for five minutes, and leave.
Phase 4:
Exercise for fifteen minutes at least once per week.
Phase 5:
Exercise three times per week.
Nearly any larger life goal can be transformed into a two-minute behavior. I want to live a healthy and long life > I need to stay in shape > I need to exercise > I need to change into my workout clothes. I want to have a happy marriage > I need to be a good partner > I should do something each day to make my partner’s life easier > I should meal plan for next week.
Whenever you are struggling to stick with a habit, you can employ the Two-Minute Rule. It’s a simple way to make your habits easy.
Chapter Summary
Habits can be completed in a few seconds but continue to impact your behavior for minutes or hours afterward.
Many habits occur at decisive moments—choices that are like a fork in the road—and either send you in the direction of a productive day or an unproductive one.
The Two-Minute Rule states, “When you start a new habit, it should take less than two minutes to do.”
The more you ritualize the beginning of a process, the more likely it becomes that you can slip into the state of deep focus that is required to do great things.
Standardize before you optimize. You can’t improve a habit that doesn’t
exist.

14
How to Make Good Habits Inevitable and Bad Habits Impossible
IN THE SUMMER OF 1830,
Victor Hugo was facing an impossible deadline. Twelve months earlier, the French author had promised his publisher a new book. But instead of writing, he spent that year pursuing other projects, entertaining guests, and delaying his work. Frustrated, Hugo’s publisher responded by setting a deadline less than six months away. The book had to be finished by February 1831.
Hugo concocted a strange plan to beat his procrastination. He collected all of his clothes and asked an assistant to lock them away in a large chest. He was left with nothing to wear except a large shawl. Lacking any suitable clothing to go outdoors,
he remained in his study and wrote furiously during the fall and winter of 1830. The Hunchback of Notre Dame
was published two weeks early on January 14, 1831.
*
Sometimes success is less about making good habits easy and more about making bad habits hard. This is an inversion of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change: make it difficult
. If you find yourself continually
struggling to follow through on your plans, then you can take a page from Victor Hugo and make your bad habits more difficult by creating what psychologists call a commitment device
.
A commitment device is a choice you make in the present that controls your actions in the future. It is a way to lock in future behavior, bind you to good habits, and restrict you from bad ones. When Victor Hugo shut his clothes away so he could focus on writing, he was creating a commitment device.
*
There are many ways to create a commitment device. You can reduce overeating by purchasing food in individual packages rather than in bulk size. You can voluntarily ask to be added to the banned list at casinos and online poker sites to prevent future gambling sprees. I’ve even heard of athletes who have to “make weight” for a competition choosing to leave their wallets at home during the week before weigh-in so they won’t be tempted to buy fast food.
As another example, my friend and fellow habits expert Nir Eyal purchased an outlet timer, which is an adapter that he plugged in between his internet router and the power outlet. At 10 p.m. each night, the
outlet timer cuts off the power to the router. When the internet goes off, everyone knows it is time to go to bed.
Commitment devices are useful because they enable you to take advantage of good intentions before you can fall victim to temptation. Whenever I’m looking to cut calories, for example, I will ask the waiter to split my meal and box half of it to go before
the meal is served. If I waited until the meal came out and told myself “I’ll just eat half,” it would never work.
The key is to change the task such that it requires more work to get out
of the good habit than to get started on it. If you’re feeling motivated to get in shape, schedule a yoga session and pay ahead of time. If you’re excited about the business you want to start, email an entrepreneur you respect and set up a consulting call. When the time comes to act, the only way to bail is to cancel the meeting, which requires effort and may cost money.
Commitment devices increase the odds that you’ll do the right thing in the future by making bad habits difficult in the present. However, we can do even better. We can make good habits inevitable and bad habits impossible.
HOW TO AUTOMATE A HABIT AND NEVER THINK ABOUT IT AGAIN
John Henry Patterson was born in Dayton, Ohio, in 1844. He spent his childhood doing chores on the family farm and working shifts at his father’s sawmill. After attending college at Dartmouth, Patterson returned to Ohio and opened a small supply store for coal miners.
It seemed like a good opportunity. The store faced little competition and enjoyed a steady stream of customers, but still struggled to make money. That was when Patterson discovered his employees were stealing from him.
In the mid-1800s, employee theft was a common problem. Receipts were kept in an open drawer and could easily be altered or discarded. There were no video cameras to review behavior and no software to track transactions. Unless you were willing to hover over your employees every minute of the day, or to manage all transactions yourself, it was difficult to prevent theft.
As Patterson mulled over his predicament, he came across an advertisement for a new invention called Ritty’s Incorruptible Cashier.
Designed by fellow Dayton resident James Ritty, it was the first cash register. The machine automatically locked the cash and receipts inside after each transaction. Patterson bought two for fifty dollars each.
Employee theft at his store vanished overnight. In the next six months,
Patterson’s business went from losing money to making $5,000 in profit—the equivalent of more than $100,000 today.
Patterson was so impressed with the machine that he changed businesses. He bought the rights to Ritty’s invention and opened the National Cash Register Company. Ten years later, National Cash Register had over one thousand employees and was on its way to becoming one of the most successful businesses of its time.
The best way to break a bad habit is to make it impractical to do. Increase the friction until you don’t even have the option to act. The brilliance of the cash register was that it automated ethical behavior by making stealing practically impossible. Rather than trying to change the employees, it made the preferred behavior automatic.
Some actions—like installing a cash register—pay off again and again. These onetime choices require a little bit of effort up front but create increasing value over time. I’m fascinated by the idea that a single choice can deliver returns again and again, and I surveyed my readers on their favorite
onetime actions that lead to better long-term habits. The table on the following page shares some of the most popular answers.
I’d wager that if the average person were to simply do half of the onetime actions on this list—even if they didn’t give another thought to their habits—most would find themselves living a better life a year from now. These onetime actions are a straightforward way to employ the 3rd Law of Behavior Change. They make it easier to sleep well, eat healthy, be productive, save money, and generally live better.
ONETIME ACTIONS THAT LOCK IN GOOD HABITS
Nutrition
Buy a water filter to clean your drinking water.
Use smaller plates to reduce caloric intake.
Sleep
Buy a good mattress.
Get blackout curtains.
Remove your television from your bedroom.
Productivity
Unsubscribe from emails.
Turn off notifications and mute group chats.
Set your phone to silent.
Use email filters to clear up your inbox.
Delete games and social media apps on your phone.
Happiness
Get a dog.
Move to a friendly, social neighborhood.
General Health
Get vaccinated.
Buy good shoes to avoid back pain.
Buy a supportive chair or standing desk.
Finance
Enroll in an automatic savings plan.
Set up automatic bill pay.
Cut cable service.
Ask service providers to lower your bills.
Of course, there are many ways to automate good habits and eliminate bad ones. Typically, they involve putting technology to work for you. Technology can transform actions that were once hard, annoying, and complicated into behaviors that are easy, painless, and simple. It is the most reliable and effective way to guarantee the right behavior.
This is particularly useful for behaviors that happen too infrequently to become habitual. Things you have to do monthly or yearly—like rebalancing your investment portfolio—are never repeated frequently enough to become a habit, so they benefit in particular from technology “remembering” to do them for you.
Other examples include:
Medicine: Prescriptions can be automatically refilled.
Personal finance: Employees can save for retirement with an automatic wage deduction.
Cooking: Meal-delivery services can do your grocery shopping.
Productivity: Social media browsing can be cut off with a website blocker.
When you automate as much of your life as possible, you can spend your effort on the tasks machines cannot do yet. Each habit that we hand over to the authority of technology frees up time and energy to pour into the next stage of growth. As mathematician and philosopher Alfred North Whitehead wrote, “
Civilization advances by extending the number of operations we can perform without thinking about them.”
Of course, the power of technology can work against us as well. Binge-watching becomes a habit because you have to put more effort in to stop
looking at the screen than to continue doing so. Instead of pressing a button to advance to the next episode, Netflix or YouTube will autoplay it for you. All you have to do is keep your eyes open.
Technology creates a level of convenience that enables you to act on your smallest whims and desires. At the mere suggestion of hunger, you can have food delivered to your door. At the slightest hint of boredom, you can get lost in the vast expanse of social media. When the effort required to act on your desires becomes effectively zero, you can find yourself slipping into whatever impulse arises at the moment. The downside of automation is that we can find ourselves jumping from easy task to easy task without making time for more difficult, but ultimately more rewarding, work.
I often find myself gravitating toward social media during any
downtime. If I feel bored for just a fraction of a second, I reach for my phone. It’s easy to write off these minor distractions as “just taking a break,” but over time they can accumulate into a serious issue. The constant tug of “just one more minute” can prevent me from doing anything of consequence. (I’m not the only one.
The average person spends over two hours per day on social media. What could you do with an extra six hundred hours per year?)
During the year I was writing this book, I experimented with a new time management strategy. Every Monday, my assistant would reset the passwords on all my social media accounts, which logged me out on each device. All week I worked without distraction. On Friday, she would send me the new passwords. I had the entire weekend to enjoy what social media had to offer until Monday morning when she would do it again. (If you don’t have an assistant, team up with a friend or family member and reset each other’s passwords each week.)
One of the biggest surprises was how quickly I adapted. Within the first week of locking myself out of social media, I realized that I didn’t need to check it nearly as often as I had been, and I certainly didn’t need it each day. It had simply been so easy that it had become the default. Once my bad habit became impossible, I discovered that I did
actually have the motivation to work on more meaningful tasks. After I removed the mental candy from my environment, it became much easier to eat the healthy stuff.
When working in your favor, automation can make your good habits inevitable and your bad habits impossible. It is the ultimate way to lock in future behavior rather than relying on willpower in the moment. By utilizing commitment devices, strategic onetime decisions, and technology, you can create an environment of inevitability—a space where good habits are not just an outcome you hope for but an outcome that is virtually guaranteed.
Chapter Summary
The inversion of the 3rd Law of Behavior Change is make it difficult
.
A commitment device is a choice you make in the present that locks in better behavior in the future.
The ultimate way to lock in future behavior is to automate your habits.
Onetime choices—like buying a better mattress or enrolling in an automatic savings plan—are single actions that automate your future habits and deliver increasing returns over time.
Using technology to automate your habits is the most reliable and effective way to guarantee the right
behavior.
HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT
The 1st Law: Make It Obvious
1.1:
Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them.
1.2:
Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].”
1.3:
Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
1.4:
Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible.
The 2nd Law: Make It Attractive
2.1:
Use temptation bundling. Pair an action you want
to do with an action you need
to do.
2.2:
Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior.
2.3:
Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit.
The 3rd Law: Make It Easy
3.1:
Reduce friction. Decrease the number of steps between you and your good habits.
3.2:
Prime the environment. Prepare your environment to make future actions easier.
3.3:
Master the decisive moment. Optimize the small choices that deliver outsized impact.
3.4:
Use the Two-Minute Rule. Downscale your habits until they can be done in two minutes or less.
3.5:
Automate your habits. Invest in technology and onetime purchases that lock in future behavior.
The 4th Law: Make It Satisfying
HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT
Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible
1.5:
Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment.
Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive
2.4:
Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits.
Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult
3.6:
Increase friction. Increase the number of steps between you and your bad habits.
3.7:
Use a commitment device. Restrict your future choices to the ones that benefit you.
Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying
You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet

THE 4TH LAW
Make It
Satisfying

15
The Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change
IN THE LATE
1990
S
,
a public health worker named Stephen Luby left his hometown of Omaha, Nebraska, and bought a one-way ticket to Karachi, Pakistan.
Karachi was one of the most populous cities in the world. By 1998,
over nine million people called it home. It was the economic center of Pakistan and a transportation hub, with some of the most active airports and seaports in the region. In the commercial parts of town, you could find all of the standard urban amenities and bustling downtown streets. But Karachi was also one of the least
livable cities in the world.
Over 60 percent of Karachi’s residents lived in squatter settlements and slums. These densely packed neighborhoods were filled with makeshift houses cobbled together from old boards, cinder blocks, and other discarded materials. There was no waste removal system, no electricity grid, no clean water supply. When dry, the streets were a combination of dust and trash. When wet, they became a muddy pit of sewage. Mosquito colonies thrived in pools of stagnant water, and children played among the garbage.
The unsanitary conditions lead to widespread illness and disease.
Contaminated water sources caused epidemics of diarrhea, vomiting, and abdominal pain. Nearly one third of the children living there were malnourished. With so many people crammed into such a small space, viruses and bacterial infections spread rapidly.
It was this public health crisis that had brought Stephen Luby to Pakistan.
Luby and his team realized that in an environment with poor sanitation, the simple habit of washing your hands could make a real difference in the health of the residents. But they soon discovered that many people were already aware that handwashing was important.
And yet, despite this knowledge, many residents were washing their hands in a haphazard fashion. Some people would just run their hands under the water quickly. Others would only wash one hand. Many would simply forget to wash their hands before preparing food. Everyone said
handwashing was important, but few people made a habit out of it. The problem wasn’t knowledge. The problem was consistency.
That was when Luby and his team partnered with Procter & Gamble to supply the neighborhood with Safeguard soap. Compared to your standard bar of soap, using Safeguard was a more enjoyable experience.
“
In Pakistan, Safeguard was a premium soap,” Luby told me. “The study participants commonly mentioned how much they liked it.” The soap foamed easily, and people were able to lather their hands with suds. It smelled great. Instantly, handwashing became slightly more pleasurable.
“I see the goal of handwashing promotion not as behavior change but as habit adoption,” Luby said. “It is a lot easier for people to adopt a product that provides a strong positive sensory signal, for example the mint taste of toothpaste, than it is to adopt a habit that does not provide pleasurable sensory feedback, like flossing one’s teeth. The marketing team at Procter & Gamble talked about trying to create a positive handwashing experience.”
Within months, the researchers saw a rapid shift in the health of children in the neighborhood.
The rate of diarrhea fell by 52 percent; pneumonia by 48 percent; and impetigo, a bacterial skin infection, by 35 percent.
The long-term effects were even better. “We went back to some of the households in Karachi six years after,” Luby told me. “
Over 95 percent of households who had been given the soap for free and encouraged to wash their hands had a handwashing station with soap and water available when our study team visited. . . . We had not given any soap to the intervention group for over five years, but during the trial they had become so habituated to wash their hands, that they had maintained the practice.” It was a powerful example of the fourth and final Law of Behavior Change: make it satisfying.
We are more likely to repeat a behavior when the experience is satisfying. This is entirely logical. Feelings of pleasure—even minor ones like washing your hands with soap that smells nice and lathers well—are signals that tell the brain: “This feels good. Do this again, next time.” Pleasure teaches your brain that a behavior is worth remembering and repeating.
Take the story of chewing gum.
Chewing gum had been sold commercially throughout the 1800s, but it wasn’t until Wrigley launched in 1891 that it became a worldwide habit. Early versions were made from relatively bland resins—chewy, but not tasty.
Wrigley revolutionized the industry by adding flavors like Spearmint and Juicy Fruit, which made the product flavorful and fun to use. Then they went a step further and began pushing chewing gum as a pathway to a clean mouth. Advertisements told readers to “Refresh Your Taste.”
Tasty flavors and the feeling of a fresh mouth provided little bits of immediate reinforcement and made the product satisfying to use. Consumption skyrocketed, and
Wrigley became the largest chewing gum company in the world.
Toothpaste had a similar trajectory. Manufacturers enjoyed great success when they added flavors like spearmint, peppermint, and cinnamon to their products. These flavors don’t improve the effectiveness of toothpaste. They simply create a “clean mouth” feel and make the experience of brushing your teeth more pleasurable. My wife actually stopped using Sensodyne because she didn’t like the aftertaste. She switched to a brand with a stronger mint flavor, which proved to be more satisfying.
Conversely, if an experience is not satisfying, we have little reason to repeat it. In my research, I came across the story of a woman who had a narcissistic relative who drove her nuts. In an attempt to spend less time with this egomaniac, she acted as dull and as boring as possible whenever he was around. Within a few encounters,
he
started avoiding her
because he found her so uninteresting.
Stories like these are evidence of the Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What is rewarded is repeated. What is punished is avoided.
You learn what to do in the future based on what you were rewarded for doing (or punished for doing) in the past. Positive emotions cultivate habits. Negative emotions destroy them.
The first three laws of behavior change—make it obvious, make it attractive,
and make it easy
—increase the odds that a behavior will be performed this
time. The fourth law of behavior change—make it satisfying
—increases the odds that a behavior will be repeated next
time. It completes the habit loop.
But there is a trick. We are not looking for just any type of satisfaction. We are looking for immediate satisfaction.
THE MISMATCH BETWEEN IMMEDIATE AND DELAYED REWARDS
Imagine you’re an animal roaming the plains of Africa—a giraffe or an elephant or a lion. On any given day, most of your decisions have an immediate impact. You are always thinking about what to eat or where to sleep or how to avoid a predator. You are constantly focused on the present or the very near future. You live in what scientists call an immediate-return environment
because your actions instantly deliver clear and immediate outcomes.
Now switch back to your human self. In modern society, many of the choices you make today will not
benefit you immediately. If you do a good job at work, you’ll get a paycheck in a few weeks. If you exercise today, perhaps you won’t be overweight next year. If you save money now, maybe you’ll have enough for retirement decades from now. You live in what scientists call a delayed-return environment
because you can work for years before your actions deliver the intended payoff.
The human brain did not evolve for life in a delayed-return environment.
The earliest remains of modern humans, known as Homo sapiens sapiens
, are approximately two hundred thousand years old. These were the first humans to have a brain relatively similar to ours. In particular,
the neocortex—the newest part of the brain and the region responsible for higher functions like language—was roughly the same size two hundred thousand years ago as today. You are walking around with the same hardware as your Paleolithic ancestors.
It is only recently—during the last five hundred years or so—that
society has shifted to a predominantly delayed-return environment.
*
Compared to the age of the brain, modern society is brand-new. In the last one hundred years, we have seen the rise of the car, the airplane, the television, the personal computer, the internet, the smartphone, and Beyoncé.
The world has changed much in recent years, but human nature has changed little.
Similar to other animals on the African savannah, our ancestors spent their days responding to grave threats, securing the next meal, and taking shelter from a storm. It made sense to place a high value on instant gratification. The distant future was less of a concern. And after thousands of generations in an immediate-return environment,
our brains evolved to prefer quick payoffs to long-term ones.
Behavioral economists refer to this tendency as time inconsistency
. That is, the way your brain evaluates rewards is inconsistent across time.
*
You value the present more than the future. Usually, this tendency serves us well. A reward that is certain
right now is typically worth more than one that is merely possible
in the future. But occasionally, our bias toward instant gratification causes problems.
Why would someone smoke if they know it increases the risk of lung cancer? Why would someone overeat when they know it increases their risk of obesity? Why would someone have unsafe sex if they know it can result in sexually transmitted disease? Once you understand how the brain prioritizes rewards, the answers become clear: the consequences of bad habits are delayed while the rewards are immediate. Smoking might kill you in ten years, but it reduces stress and eases your nicotine cravings now
. Overeating is harmful in the long run but appetizing in the moment. Sex—safe or not—provides pleasure right away.
Disease and infection won’t show up for days or weeks, even years.
Every habit produces multiple outcomes across time. Unfortunately,
these outcomes are often misaligned. With our bad habits, the immediate outcome usually feels good, but the ultimate outcome feels bad. With good habits, it is the reverse: the immediate outcome is unenjoyable, but the ultimate outcome feels good. The French economist
Frédéric Bastiat explained the problem clearly when he wrote, “It almost always happens that when the immediate consequence is favorable, the later consequences are disastrous, and vice versa. . . . Often, the sweeter the first fruit of a habit, the more bitter are its later fruits.”
Put another way, the costs of your good habits are in the present. The costs of your bad habits are in the future.
The brain’s tendency to prioritize the present moment means you can’t rely on good intentions. When you make a plan—to lose weight, write a book, or learn a language—you are actually making plans for your future self. And when you envision what you want your life to be like, it is easy to see the value in taking actions with long-term benefits. We all want better lives for our future selves. However, when the moment of decision arrives, instant gratification usually wins. You are no longer making a choice for
Future You, who dreams of being fitter or wealthier or happier. You are choosing for Present You, who wants to be full, pampered, and entertained. As a general rule, the more immediate pleasure you get from an action, the more strongly you should question whether it aligns with your long-term goals.
*
With a fuller understanding of what causes our brain to repeat some behaviors and avoid others, let’s update the Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What is immediately
rewarded is repeated. What is immediately
punished is avoided.
Our preference for instant gratification reveals an important truth about success: because of how we are wired, most people will spend all day chasing quick hits of satisfaction. The road less traveled is the road of delayed gratification. If you’re willing to wait for the rewards, you’ll face less competition and often get a bigger payoff. As the saying goes, the last mile is always the least crowded.
This is precisely what research has shown.
People who are better at delaying gratification have higher SAT scores, lower levels of substance abuse, lower likelihood of obesity, better responses to stress, and superior social skills. We’ve all seen this play out in our own lives. If you delay watching television and get your homework done, you’ll generally learn more and get better grades. If you don’t buy desserts and chips at the store, you’ll often eat healthier food when you get home. At some point, success in nearly every field requires you to ignore an immediate reward in favor of a delayed reward.
Here’s the problem: most people know
that delaying gratification is the wise approach. They want the benefits of good habits: to be healthy, productive, at peace. But these outcomes are seldom top-of-mind at the decisive moment. Thankfully, it’s possible to train yourself to delay gratification—but you need to work with the grain of human nature, not against it. The best way to do this is to add a little bit of immediate pleasure to the habits that pay off in the long-run and a little bit of immediate pain to ones that don’t.
HOW TO TURN INSTANT GRATIFICATION TO YOUR ADVANTAGE
The vital thing in getting a habit to stick is to feel successful—even if it’s in a small way. The feeling of success is a signal that your habit paid off and that the work was worth the effort.
In a perfect world, the reward for a good habit is the habit itself. In
the real world, good habits tend to feel worthwhile only after they have provided you with something. Early on, it’s all sacrifice. You’ve gone to the gym a few times, but you’re not stronger or fitter or faster—at least, not in any noticeable sense. It’s only months later, once you shed a few pounds or your arms gain some definition, that it becomes easier to exercise for its own sake. In the beginning, you need a reason to stay on track. This is why immediate rewards are essential. They keep you excited while the delayed rewards accumulate in the background.
What we’re really talking about here—when we’re discussing immediate rewards—is the ending of a behavior. The ending of any experience is vital because we tend to remember it more than other phases. You want the ending of your habit to be satisfying. The best approach is to use reinforcement
, which refers to the process of using an immediate reward to increase the rate of a behavior. Habit stacking, which we covered in Chapter 5, ties your habit to an immediate cue, which makes it obvious when to start. Reinforcement ties your habit to an immediate reward, which makes it satisfying when you finish.
Immediate reinforcement can be especially helpful when dealing with habits of avoidance
, which are behaviors you want to stop doing. It can be challenging to stick with habits like “no frivolous purchases” or “no alcohol this month” because nothing happens when you skip happy hour drinks or don’t buy that pair of shoes. It can be hard to feel satisfied when there is no action in the first place. All you’re doing is resisting temptation, and there isn’t much satisfying about that.
One solution is to turn the situation on its head. You want to make avoidance visible. Open a savings account and label it for something you want—maybe “Leather Jacket.” Whenever you pass on a purchase, put the same amount of money in the account. Skip your morning latte? Transfer $5. Pass on another month of Netflix? Move $10 over. It’s like creating a loyalty program for yourself. The immediate reward of seeing yourself save money toward the leather jacket feels
a lot better than being deprived. You are making it satisfying to do nothing.
One of my readers and his wife used a similar setup. They wanted to stop eating out so much and start cooking together more. They labeled their savings account “Trip to Europe.” Whenever they skipped going out to eat, they transferred $50 into the account. At the end of the year, they put the money toward the vacation.
It is worth noting that it is important to select short-term rewards that reinforce your identity rather than ones that conflict with it. Buying a new jacket is fine if you’re trying to lose weight or read more books, but it doesn’t work if you’re trying to budget and save money. Instead, taking a bubble bath or going on a leisurely walk are good examples of rewarding yourself with free time, which aligns with your ultimate goal of more freedom and financial independence. Similarly, if your reward for exercising is eating a bowl of ice cream, then you’re casting votes for conflicting identities, and it ends up being a wash. Instead, maybe your reward is a massage, which is both a luxury and a vote toward taking care of your body. Now the short-term reward is aligned with your long-term vision of being a healthy person.
Eventually, as intrinsic rewards like a better mood, more energy, and reduced stress kick in, you’ll become less concerned with chasing the secondary reward. The identity itself becomes the reinforcer. You do it because it’s who you are and it feels good to be you. The more a habit becomes part of your life, the less you need outside encouragement to follow through. Incentives can start a habit. Identity sustains a habit.
That said, it takes time for the evidence to accumulate and a new identity to emerge. Immediate reinforcement helps maintain motivation in the short term while you’re waiting for the long-term rewards to arrive.
In summary, a habit needs to be enjoyable for it to last. Simple bits
of reinforcement—like soap that smells great or toothpaste that has a refreshing mint flavor or seeing $50 hit your savings account—can offer the immediate pleasure you need to enjoy a habit. And change is easy when it is enjoyable.
Chapter Summary
The 4th Law of Behavior Change is make it satisfying
.
We are more likely to repeat a behavior when the experience is satisfying.
The human brain evolved to prioritize immediate rewards over delayed rewards.
The Cardinal Rule of Behavior Change: What is immediately rewarded is repeated. What is immediately punished is avoided.
To get a habit to stick you need to feel immediately successful—even if it’s in a small way.
The first three laws of behavior change—make it obvious, make it attractive,
and make it easy
—increase the odds that a behavior will be performed this time. The fourth law of behavior change—make it satisfying
—increases the odds that a behavior will be repeated next
time.

16
How to Stick with Good Habits Every Day
IN 1993
, a bank in Abbotsford, Canada, hired a twenty-three-year-old stockbroker named Trent Dyrsmid. Abbotsford was a relatively small suburb, tucked away in the shadow of nearby Vancouver, where most of the big business deals were being made. Given the location, and the fact that Dyrsmid was a rookie, nobody expected too much of him. But he made brisk progress thanks to a simple daily habit.
Dyrsmid began each morning with two jars on his desk. One was filled with 120 paper clips. The other was empty. As soon as he settled in each day, he would make a sales call. Immediately after, he would move one paper clip from the full jar to the empty jar and the process would begin again. “Every morning
I would start with 120 paper clips in one jar and I would keep dialing the phone until I had moved them all to the second jar,” he told me.
Within eighteen months, Dyrsmid was bringing in $5 million to the firm. By age twenty-four, he was making $75,000 per year—the equivalent of $125,000 today. Not long after, he landed a six-figure job with another company.
I like to refer to this technique as the Paper Clip Strategy and, over
the years, I’ve heard from readers who have employed it in a variety of ways. One woman shifted a hairpin from one container to another whenever she wrote a page of her book. Another man moved a marble from one bin to the next after each set of push-ups.
Making progress is satisfying, and visual measures—like moving paper clips or hairpins or marbles—provide clear evidence of your progress. As a result, they reinforce your behavior and add a little bit of immediate satisfaction to any activity. Visual measurement comes in many forms: food journals, workout logs, loyalty punch cards, the progress bar on a software download, even the page numbers in a book. But perhaps the best way to measure your progress is with a habit tracker
.
HOW TO KEEP YOUR HABITS ON TRACK
A habit tracker is a simple way to measure whether you did a habit. The most basic format is to get a calendar and cross off each day you stick with your routine. For example, if you meditate on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, each of those dates gets an X
. As time rolls by, the calendar becomes a record of your habit streak.
Countless people have tracked their habits, but perhaps the most famous was
Benjamin Franklin. Beginning at age twenty, Franklin carried a small booklet everywhere he went and used it to track thirteen personal virtues. This list included goals like “Lose no time. Be always employed in something useful” and “Avoid trifling conversation.” At the end of each day, Franklin would open his booklet and record his progress.
Jerry Seinfeld reportedly uses a habit tracker to stick with his streak of writing jokes. In the documentary Comedian
, he explains that his goal is simply to “never break the chain” of writing jokes every day. In other words, he is not focused on how good or bad a particular joke is
or how inspired he feels. He is simply focused on showing up and adding to his streak.
“Don’t break the chain” is a powerful mantra. Don’t break the chain of sales calls and you’ll build a successful book of business. Don’t break the chain of workouts and you’ll get fit faster than you’d expect.
Don’t break the chain of creating every day and you will end up with an impressive portfolio. Habit tracking is powerful because it leverages multiple Laws of Behavior Change. It simultaneously makes a behavior obvious, attractive, and satisfying.
Let’s break down each one.
Benefit #1: Habit tracking is obvious.
Recording your last action creates a trigger that can initiate your next one. Habit tracking naturally builds a series of visual cues like the streak of X
’s on your calendar or the list of meals in your food log. When you look at the calendar and see your streak, you’ll be reminded to act again. Research has shown that
people who track their progress on goals like losing weight, quitting smoking, and lowering blood pressure are all more likely to improve than those who don’t. One study of more than sixteen hundred people found that
those who kept a daily food log lost twice as much weight as those who did not. The mere act of tracking a behavior can spark the urge to change it.
Habit tracking also keeps you honest. Most of us have a distorted view of our own behavior. We think we act better than we do. Measurement offers one way to overcome our blindness to our own behavior and notice what’s really going on each day. One glance at the paper clips in the container and you immediately know how much work you have (or haven’t) been putting in. When the evidence is right in front of you, you’re less likely to lie to yourself.
Benefit #2: Habit tracking is attractive.
The most effective form of motivation is progress. When we get a signal that we are moving forward, we become more motivated to continue down that path. In this way, habit tracking can have an addictive effect on motivation. Each small win feeds your desire.
This can be particularly powerful on a bad day. When you’re feeling down, it’s easy to forget about all the progress you have already made. Habit tracking provides visual proof of your hard work—a subtle reminder of how far you’ve come. Plus, the empty square you see each morning can motivate you to get started because you don’t want to lose your progress by breaking the streak.
Benefit #3: Habit tracking is satisfying.
This is the most crucial benefit of all. Tracking can become its own form of reward. It is satisfying to cross an item off your to-do list, to complete an entry in your workout log, or to mark an X
on the calendar. It feels good to watch your results grow—the size of your investment portfolio, the length of your book manuscript—and if it feels good, then you’re more likely to endure.
Habit tracking also helps keep your eye on the ball: you’re focused on the process rather than the result. You’re not fixated on getting six-pack abs, you’re just trying to keep the streak alive and become the type of person who doesn’t miss workouts.
In summary, habit tracking (1) creates a visual cue that can remind you to act, (2) is inherently motivating because you see the progress you are making and don’t want to lose it, and (3) feels satisfying whenever you record another successful instance of your habit. Furthermore, habit tracking provides visual proof that you are casting votes
for the type of person you wish to become, which is a delightful form of immediate and intrinsic gratification.
*
You may be wondering, if habit tracking is so useful, why have I waited so long to talk about it?
Despite all the benefits, I’ve left this discussion until now for a simple reason: many people resist the idea of tracking and measuring. It can feel like a burden because it forces you into two
habits: the habit you’re trying to build and the habit of tracking it. Counting calories sounds like a hassle when you’re already struggling to follow a diet. Writing down every sales call seems tedious when you’ve got work to do. It feels easier to say, “I’ll just eat less.” Or, “I’ll try harder.” Or, “I’ll remember to do it.” People inevitably tell me things like, “I have a decision journal, but I wish I used it more.” Or, “I recorded my workouts for a week, but then quit.” I’ve been there myself. I once made a food log to track my calories. I managed to do it for one meal
and then gave up.
Tracking isn’t for everyone, and there is no need to measure your entire life. But nearly anyone can benefit from it in some form—even if it’s only temporary.
What can we do to make tracking easier?
First, whenever possible, measurement should be automated. You’ll probably be surprised by how much you’re already tracking without knowing it. Your credit card statement tracks how often you go out to eat. Your Fitbit registers how many steps you take and how long you sleep. Your calendar records how many new places you travel to each year. Once you know where to get the data, add a note to your calendar to review it each week or each month, which is more practical than tracking it every day.
Second, manual tracking should be limited to your most important
habits. It is better to consistently track one habit than to sporadically track ten.
Finally, record each measurement immediately after the habit occurs. The completion of the behavior is the cue to write it down. This approach allows you to combine the habit-stacking method mentioned in Chapter 5 with habit tracking.
The habit stacking + habit tracking formula is:
After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [TRACK MY HABIT].
After I hang up the phone from a sales call, I will move one paper clip over.
After I finish each set at the gym, I will record it in my workout journal.
After I put my plate in the dishwasher, I will write down what I ate.
These tactics can make tracking your habits easier. Even if you aren’t the type of person who enjoys recording your behavior, I think you’ll find a few weeks of measurements to be insightful. It’s always interesting to see how you’ve actually
been spending your time.
That said, every habit streak ends at some point. And, more important than any single measurement, is having a good plan for when your habits slide off track.
HOW TO RECOVER QUICKLY WHEN YOUR HABITS BREAK DOWN
No matter how consistent you are with your habits, it is inevitable that life will interrupt you at some point. Perfection is not possible. Before long, an emergency will pop up—you get sick or you have to travel for work or your family needs a little more of your time.
Whenever this happens to me, I try to remind myself of a simple rule: never miss twice.
If I miss one day, I try to get back into it as quickly as possible. Missing one workout happens, but I’m not going to miss two in a row. Maybe I’ll eat an entire pizza, but I’ll follow it up with a healthy meal. I can’t be perfect, but I can avoid a second lapse. As soon as one streak ends, I get started on the next one.
The first mistake is never the one that ruins you. It is the spiral of repeated mistakes that follows.
Missing once is an accident. Missing twice is the start of a new habit.
This is a distinguishing feature between winners and losers. Anyone can have a bad performance, a bad workout, or a bad day at work. But when successful people fail, they rebound quickly. The breaking of a habit doesn’t matter if the reclaiming of it is fast.
I think this principle is so important that I’ll stick to it even if I can’t do a habit as well or as completely as I would like. Too often, we fall into an all-or-nothing cycle with our habits. The problem is not slipping up; the problem is thinking that if you can’t do something perfectly, then you shouldn’t do it at all.
You don’t realize how valuable it is to just show up on your bad (or busy) days. Lost days hurt you more than successful days help you. If you start with $100, then a 50 percent gain will take you to $150. But you only need a 33 percent loss to take you back to $100. In other words, avoiding a 33 percent loss is just as valuable as achieving a 50 percent gain. As Charlie Munger says, “The first rule of compounding: Never interrupt it unnecessarily.”
This is why the “bad” workouts are often the most important ones. Sluggish days and bad workouts maintain the compound gains you accrued from previous good days. Simply doing something—ten squats, five sprints, a push-up, anything really—is huge. Don’t put up a zero. Don’t let losses eat into your compounding.
Furthermore, it’s not always about what happens during the workout. It’s about being the type of person who doesn’t miss workouts. It’s easy to train when you feel good, but it’s crucial to show up when you don’t feel like it—even if you do less than you hope. Going to the gym for five minutes may not improve your performance, but it reaffirms your identity.
The all-or-nothing cycle of behavior change is just one pitfall that can derail your habits. Another potential danger—especially if you are using a habit tracker—is measuring the wrong thing.
KNOWING WHEN (AND WHEN NOT) TO TRACK A HABIT
Say you’re running a restaurant and you want to know if your chef is doing a good job. One way to measure success is to track how many customers pay for a meal each day. If more customers come in, the food must be good. If fewer customers come in, something must be wrong.
However, this one measurement—daily revenue—only gives a limited picture of what’s really going on. Just because someone pays for a meal doesn’t mean they enjoy
the meal. Even dissatisfied customers are unlikely to dine and dash. In fact, if you’re only measuring revenue, the food might be getting worse but you’re making up for it with marketing or discounts or some other method. Instead, it may be more effective to track how many customers finish
their meal or perhaps the percentage of customers who leave a generous tip.
The dark side of tracking a particular behavior is that we become driven by the number rather than the purpose behind it. If your success is measured by quarterly earnings, you will optimize sales, revenue, and accounting for quarterly earnings. If your success is measured by a lower number on the scale, you will optimize for a lower number
on the scale, even if that means embracing crash diets, juice cleanses, and fat-loss pills. The human mind wants to “win” whatever game is being played.
This pitfall is evident in many areas of life. We focus on working long hours instead of getting meaningful work done. We care more about getting ten thousand steps than we do about being healthy. We teach for standardized tests instead of emphasizing learning, curiosity, and critical thinking. In short, we optimize for what we measure. When we choose the wrong measurement, we get the wrong behavior.
This is sometimes referred to as Goodhart’s Law. Named after the economist Charles Goodhart, the principle states, “
When a measure becomes a target, it ceases to be a good measure.” Measurement is only useful when it guides you and adds context to a larger picture, not when it consumes you. Each number is simply one piece of feedback in the overall system.
In our data-driven world, we tend to overvalue numbers and undervalue anything ephemeral, soft, and difficult to quantify. We mistakenly think the factors we can measure are the only factors that exist. But just because you can measure something doesn’t mean it’s the most important thing. And just because you can’t
measure something doesn’t mean it’s not important at all.
All of this to say, it’s crucial to keep habit tracking in its proper place. It can feel satisfying to record a habit and track your progress, but the measurement is not the only thing that matters. Furthermore, there are many ways to measure progress, and sometimes it helps to shift your focus to something entirely different.
This is why nonscale victories
can be effective for weight loss. The number on the scale may be stubborn, so if you focus solely on that number, your motivation will sag. But you may notice that your skin looks better or you wake up earlier or your sex drive got a boost. All of these are valid ways to track your improvement. If you’re not feeling
motivated by the number on the scale, perhaps it’s time to focus on a different measurement—one that gives you more signals of progress.
No matter how you measure your improvement, habit tracking offers a simple way to make your habits more satisfying. Each measurement provides a little bit of evidence that you’re moving in the right direction and a brief moment of immediate pleasure for a job well done.
Chapter Summary
One of the most satisfying feelings is the feeling of making progress.
A habit tracker is a simple way to measure whether you did a habit—like marking an X on a calendar.
Habit trackers and other visual forms of measurement can make your habits satisfying by providing clear evidence of your progress.
Don’t break the chain. Try to keep your habit streak alive.
Never miss twice. If you miss one day, try to get back on track as quickly as possible.
Just because you can measure something doesn’t mean it’s the most important thing.

17
How an Accountability Partner Can Change Everything
AFTER SERVING AS
a pilot in World War II, Roger Fisher attended Harvard Law School and spent thirty-four years specializing in negotiation and conflict management. He founded the Harvard Negotiation Project and worked with numerous countries and world leaders on peace resolutions, hostage crises, and diplomatic compromises. But it was in the 1970s and 1980s, as the threat of nuclear war escalated, that Fisher developed perhaps his most interesting idea.
At the time, Fisher was focused on designing strategies that could prevent nuclear war, and he had noticed a troubling fact. Any sitting president would have access to launch codes that could kill millions of people but would never actually see anyone die because he would always be thousands of miles away.
“My suggestion was quite simple,” he wrote in 1981. “Put that [nuclear] code number in a little capsule, and then implant that capsule right next to the heart of a volunteer. The volunteer would carry with him a big, heavy butcher knife as he accompanied the President. If ever the President wanted to fire nuclear weapons, the only way he could do
so would be for him first, with his own hands, to kill one human being. The President says, ‘George, I’m sorry but tens of millions must die.’ He has to look at someone and realize what death is—what an innocent death is. Blood on the White House carpet. It’s reality brought home.
“
When I suggested this to friends in the Pentagon they said, ‘My God, that’s terrible. Having to kill someone would distort the President’s judgment. He might never push the button.’”
Throughout our discussion of the 4th Law of Behavior Change we have covered the importance of making good habits immediately satisfying. Fisher’s proposal is an inversion of the 4th Law: Make it immediately unsatisfying.
Just as we are more likely to repeat an experience when the ending is satisfying, we are also more likely to avoid an experience when the ending is painful. Pain is an effective teacher. If a failure is painful, it gets fixed. If a failure is relatively painless, it gets ignored. The more immediate and more costly a mistake is, the faster you will learn from it. The threat of a bad review forces a plumber to be good at his job. The possibility of a customer never returning makes restaurants create good food. The cost of cutting the wrong blood vessel makes a surgeon master human anatomy and cut carefully. When the consequences are severe, people learn quickly.
The more immediate the pain, the less likely the behavior. If you want to prevent bad habits and eliminate unhealthy behaviors, then adding an instant cost to the action is a great way to reduce their odds.
We repeat bad habits because they serve us in some way, and that makes them hard to abandon. The best way I know to overcome this predicament is to increase the speed of the punishment associated with the behavior. There can’t be a gap between the action and the consequences.
As soon as actions incur an immediate consequence, behavior begins to change. Customers pay their bills on time when they are charged a late fee. Students show up to class when their grade is linked to attendance. We’ll jump through a lot of hoops to avoid a little bit of immediate pain.
There is, of course, a limit to this. If you’re going to rely on punishment to change behavior, then the strength of the punishment must match the relative strength of the behavior it is trying to correct. To be productive, the cost of procrastination must be greater than the cost of action. To be healthy, the cost of laziness must be greater than the cost of exercise. Getting fined for smoking in a restaurant or failing to recycle adds consequence to an action. Behavior only shifts if the punishment is painful enough and reliably enforced.
In general, the more local, tangible, concrete, and immediate the consequence, the more likely it is to influence individual behavior. The more global, intangible, vague, and delayed the consequence, the less likely it is to influence individual behavior.
Thankfully, there is a straightforward way to add an immediate cost to any bad habit: create a habit contract
.
THE HABIT CONTRACT
The first seat belt law was passed in New York on December 1, 1984. At the time, just 14 percent of people in the United States regularly wore a seat belt—but that was all about to change.
Within five years, over half of the nation had seat belt laws. Today,
wearing a seat belt is enforceable by law in forty-nine of the fifty states. And it’s not just the legislation, the number of people wearing seat belts has changed dramatically as well. In 2016,
over 88 percent of Americans buckled up each time they got in a car. In just over thirty years, there was a complete reversal in the habits of millions of people.
Laws and regulations are an example of how government can change our habits by creating a social contract. As a society, we collectively agree to abide by certain rules and then enforce them as a group. Whenever a new piece of legislation impacts behavior—seat belt laws, banning smoking inside restaurants, mandatory recycling—it is an example of a social contract shaping our habits. The group agrees to act in a certain way, and if you don’t follow along, you’ll be punished.
Just as governments use laws to hold citizens accountable, you can create a habit contract to hold yourself accountable. A habit contract is a verbal or written agreement in which you state your commitment to a particular habit and the punishment that will occur if you don’t follow through. Then you find one or two people to act as your accountability partners and sign off on the contract with you.
Bryan Harris, an entrepreneur from Nashville, Tennessee, was the first person I saw put this strategy into action. Shortly after the birth of his son, Harris realized he wanted to shed a few pounds. He wrote up a habit contract between himself, his wife, and his personal trainer. The first version read, “Bryan’s #1 objective for Q1 of 2017 is to start eating correctly again so he feels better, looks better, and is able to hit his long-term goal of 200 pounds at 10% body fat.”
Below that statement, Harris laid out a road map for achieving his ideal outcome:
Phase #1: Get back to a strict “slow-carb” diet in Q1.
Phase #2: Start a strict macronutrient tracking program in Q2.
Phase #3: Refine and maintain the details of his diet and workout program in Q3.
Finally, he wrote out each of the daily habits that would get him to
his goal. For example, “Write down all food that he consumes each day and weigh himself each day.”
And then he listed the punishment if he failed: “If Bryan doesn’t do these two items then the following consequence will be enforced: He will have to dress up each workday and each Sunday morning for the rest of the quarter. Dress up is defined as not wearing jeans, t-shirts, hoodies, or shorts. He will also give Joey (his trainer) $200 to use as he sees fit if he misses one day of logging food.”
At the bottom of the page, Harris, his wife, and his trainer all signed the contract.
My initial reaction was that a contract like this seemed overly formal and unnecessary, especially the signatures. But Harris convinced me that signing the contract was an indication of seriousness. “Anytime I skip this part,” he said, “I start slacking almost immediately.”
Three months later, after hitting his targets for Q1, Harris upgraded his goals. The consequences escalated, too. If he missed his carbohydrate and protein targets, he had to pay his trainer $100. And if he failed to weigh himself, he had to give his wife $500 to use as she saw fit. Perhaps most painfully, if he forgot to run sprints, he had to dress up for work every day and wear an Alabama hat the rest of the quarter—the bitter rival of his beloved Auburn team.
The strategy worked. With his wife and trainer acting as accountability partners and with the habit contract clarifying exactly what to do each day, Harris lost the weight.
*
To make bad habits unsatisfying, your best option is to make them painful in the moment. Creating a habit contract is a straightforward way to do exactly that.
Even if you don’t want to create a full-blown habit contract, simply
having an accountability partner is useful. The comedian Margaret Cho writes a joke or song every day.
She does the “song a day” challenge with a friend, which helps them both stay accountable. Knowing that someone is watching can be a powerful motivator. You are less likely to procrastinate or give up because there is an immediate cost. If you don’t follow through, perhaps they’ll see you as untrustworthy or lazy. Suddenly, you are not only failing to uphold your promises to yourself, but also failing to uphold your promises to others.
You can even automate this process.
Thomas Frank, an entrepreneur in Boulder, Colorado, wakes up at 5:55 each morning. And if he doesn’t, he has a tweet automatically scheduled that says, “It’s 6:10 and I’m not up because I’m lazy! Reply to this for $5 via PayPal (limit 5), assuming my alarm didn’t malfunction.”
We are always trying to present our best selves to the world. We comb our hair and brush our teeth and dress ourselves carefully because we know these habits are likely to get a positive reaction. We want to get good grades and graduate from top schools to impress potential employers and mates and our friends and family. We care about the opinions of those around us because it helps if others like us. This is precisely why getting an accountability partner or signing a habit contract can work so well.
Chapter Summary
The inversion of the 4th Law of Behavior Change is make it unsatisfying
.
We are less likely to repeat a bad habit if it is painful or unsatisfying.
An accountability partner can create an immediate cost to inaction. We care deeply about what others think of us, and we do not want others to have a lesser opinion of us.
A habit contract can be used to add a social cost to any behavior. It makes the costs of violating your promises public and painful.
Knowing that someone else is watching you can be a powerful motivator.
HOW TO CREATE A GOOD HABIT
The 1st Law: Make It Obvious
1.1:
Fill out the Habits Scorecard. Write down your current habits to become aware of them.
1.2:
Use implementation intentions: “I will [BEHAVIOR] at [TIME] in [LOCATION].”
1.3:
Use habit stacking: “After [CURRENT HABIT], I will [NEW HABIT].”
1.4:
Design your environment. Make the cues of good habits obvious and visible.
The 2nd Law:Make It Attractive
2.1:
Use temptation bundling. Pair an action you want
to do with an action you need
to do.
2.2:
Join a culture where your desired behavior is the normal behavior.
2.3:
Create a motivation ritual. Do something you enjoy immediately before a difficult habit.
The 3rd Law: Make It Easy
3.1:
Reduce friction. Decrease the number of steps between you and your good habits.
3.2:
Prime the environment. Prepare your environment to make future actions easier.
3.3:
Master the decisive moment. Optimize the small choices that deliver outsized impact.
3.4:
Use the Two-Minute Rule. Downscale your habits until they can be done in two minutes or less.
3.5:
Automate your habits. Invest in technology and onetime purchases that lock in future behavior.
The 4th Law: Make It Satisfying
4.1:
Use reinforcement. Give yourself an immediate reward when you complete your habit.
4.2:
Make “doing nothing” enjoyable. When avoiding a bad habit, design a way to see the benefits.
4.3:
Use a habit tracker. Keep track of your habit streak and “don’t break the chain.”
4.4:
Never miss twice. When you forget to do a habit, make sure you get back on track immediately.
HOW TO BREAK A BAD HABIT
Inversion of the 1st Law: Make It Invisible
1.5:
Reduce exposure. Remove the cues of your bad habits from your environment.
Inversion of the 2nd Law: Make It Unattractive
2.4:
Reframe your mind-set. Highlight the benefits of avoiding your bad habits.
Inversion of the 3rd Law: Make It Difficult
3.6:
Increase friction. Increase the number of steps between you and your bad habits.
3.7:
Use a commitment device. Restrict your future choices to the ones that benefit you.
Inversion of the 4th Law: Make It Unsatisfying
4.5:
Get an accountability partner. Ask someone to watch your behavior.
4.6:
Create a habit contract. Make the costs of your bad habits public and painful.
You can download a printable version of this habits cheat sheet at: atomichabits.com/cheatsheet

ADVANCED TACTICS
How to Go from Being Merely Good to Being Truly
Great

18
The Truth About Talent (When Genes Matter and When They Don’t)
MANY PEOPLE ARE
familiar with Michael Phelps, who is widely considered to be one of the greatest athletes in history.
Phelps has won more Olympic medals not only than any swimmer but also more than any Olympian in any
sport.
Fewer people know the name Hicham
El Guerrouj, but he was a fantastic athlete in his own right. El Guerrouj is a Moroccan runner who holds two Olympic gold medals and is one of the greatest middle-distance runners of all time. For many years, he held the world record in the mile, 1,500-meter, and 2,000-meter races. At the Olympic Games in Athens, Greece, in 2004, he won gold in the 1,500-meter and 5,000-meter races.
These two athletes are wildly different in many ways. (For starters, one competed on land and the other in water.) But most notably,
they differ significantly in height. El Guerrouj is five feet, nine inches tall. Phelps is six feet, four inches tall. Despite this seven-inch difference in height, the two men are identical in one respect: Michael Phelps and Hicham El Guerrouj wear the
same length inseam on their pants.
How is this possible? Phelps has relatively short legs for his height and a very long torso, the perfect build for swimming. El Guerrouj has incredibly long legs and a short upper body, an ideal frame for distance running.
Now, imagine if these world-class athletes were to switch sports. Given his remarkable athleticism, could Michael Phelps become an Olympic-caliber distance runner with enough training? It’s unlikely. At peak fitness, Phelps weighed 194 pounds, which is 40 percent heavier than El Guerrouj, who competed at an ultralight 138 pounds. Taller runners are heavier runners, and every extra pound is a curse when it comes to distance running. Against elite competition, Phelps would be doomed from the start.
Similarly, El Guerrouj might be one of the best runners in history, but it’s doubtful he would ever qualify for the Olympics as a swimmer. Since 1976, the
average height of Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 1,500-meter run is five feet, ten inches. In comparison, the
average height of Olympic gold medalists in the men’s 100-meter freestyle swim is six feet, four inches. Swimmers tend to be tall and have long backs and arms, which are ideal for pulling through the water. El Guerrouj would be at a severe disadvantage before he ever touched the pool.
The secret to maximizing your odds of success is to choose the right field of competition. This is just as true with habit change as it is with sports and business. Habits are easier to perform, and more satisfying to stick with, when they align with your natural inclinations and abilities. Like Michael Phelps in the pool or Hicham El Guerrouj on the track, you want to play a game where the odds are in your favor.
Embracing this strategy requires the acceptance of the simple truth that people are born with different abilities. Some people don’t like to discuss this fact. On the surface, your genes seem to be fixed, and it’s
no fun to talk about things you cannot control. Plus, phrases like biological determinism
makes it sound like certain individuals are destined for success and others doomed to failure. But this is a shortsighted view of the influence of genes on behavior.
The strength of genetics is also their weakness. Genes cannot be easily changed, which means they provide a powerful advantage in favorable circumstances and a serious disadvantage in unfavorable circumstances. If you want to dunk a basketball, being seven feet tall is very useful. If you want to perform a gymnastics routine, being seven feet tall is a great hindrance. Our environment determines the suitability of our genes and the utility of our natural talents. When our environment changes, so do the qualities that determine success.
This is true not just for physical characteristics but for mental ones as well. I’m smart if you ask me about habits and human behavior; not so much when it comes to knitting, rocket propulsion, or guitar chords. Competence is highly dependent on context.
The people at the top of any competitive field are not only well trained, they are also well suited to the task. And this is why, if you want to be truly great, selecting the right place to focus is crucial.
In short: genes do not determine your destiny. They determine your areas of opportunity. As physician Gabor Mate notes, “
Genes can predispose, but they don’t predetermine.” The areas where you are genetically predisposed to success are the areas where habits are more likely to be satisfying. The key is to direct your effort toward areas that both excite you and match your natural skills, to align your ambition with your ability.
The obvious question is, “How do I figure out where the odds are in my favor? How do I identify the opportunities and habits that are right for me?” The first place we will look for an answer is by understanding your personality.
HOW YOUR PERSONALITY INFLUENCES YOUR HABITS
Your genes are operating beneath the surface of every habit. Indeed, beneath the surface of every behavior
.
Genes have been shown to influence everything from the number of hours you spend watching television to your likelihood to marry or divorce to your tendency to get addicted to drugs, alcohol, or nicotine.
There’s a strong genetic component to how obedient or rebellious you are when facing authority, how vulnerable or resistant you are to stressful events, how proactive or reactive you tend to be, and even how captivated or bored you feel during sensory experiences like attending a concert. As
Robert Plomin, a behavioral geneticist at King’s College in London, told me, “It is now at the point where we have stopped testing to see if traits have a genetic component because we literally can’t find a single one that isn’t influenced by our genes.”
Bundled together, your unique cluster of genetic traits predispose you to a particular personality. Your personality is the set of characteristics that is consistent from situation to situation. The most proven scientific analysis of personality traits is known as the “Big Five,” which breaks them down into five spectrums of behavior.
Openness to experience: from curious and inventive on one end to cautious and consistent on the other.
Conscientiousness: organized and efficient to easygoing and spontaneous.
Extroversion: outgoing and energetic to solitary and reserved (you likely know them as extroverts vs. introverts).
Agreeableness: friendly and compassionate to challenging and detached.
Neuroticism: anxious and sensitive to confident, calm, and stable.
All five characteristics have biological underpinnings. Extroversion, for instance, can be tracked from birth. If scientists play a loud noise in the nursing ward, some babies turn toward it while others turn away. When the researchers tracked these children through life, they found that the babies who turned toward the noise were more likely to grow up to be extroverts. Those who turned away were
more likely to become introverts.
People who are high in agreeableness are kind, considerate, and warm.
They also tend to have higher natural oxytocin levels, a hormone that plays an important role in social bonding, increases feelings of trust, and can act as a natural antidepressant. You can easily imagine how someone with more oxytocin might be inclined to build habits like writing thank-you notes or organizing social events.
As a third example, consider neuroticism, which is a personality trait all people possess to various degrees. People who are high in neuroticism tend to be anxious and worry more than others. This trait has been linked to
hypersensitivity of the amygdala, the portion of the brain responsible for noticing threats. In other words, people who are more sensitive to negative cues in their environment are more likely to score high in neuroticism.
Our habits are not solely determined by our personalities, but there is no doubt that our genes nudge us in a certain direction.
Our deeply rooted preferences make certain behaviors easier for some people than for others. You don’t have to apologize for these differences or feel guilty about them, but you do have to work with them. A person who scores lower on conscientiousness, for example, will be less likely to be orderly by nature and may need to rely more heavily on environment design to stick with good habits. (As a reminder for the less conscientious readers among us, environment design is a strategy we discussed in Chapters 6 and 12.)
The takeaway is that you should build habits that work for your
personality.
*
People can get ripped working out like a bodybuilder, but if you prefer rock climbing or cycling or rowing, then shape your exercise habit around your interests.
If your friend follows a low-carb diet but you find that low-fat works for you, then more power to you. If you want to read more, don’t be embarrassed if you prefer steamy romance novels over nonfiction. Read whatever fascinates you.
*
You don’t have to build the habits everyone tells you to build. Choose the habit that best suits you, not the one that is most popular.
There is a version of every habit that can bring you joy and satisfaction. Find it. Habits need to be enjoyable if they are going to stick. This is the core idea behind the 4th Law.
Tailoring your habits to your personality is a good start, but this is not the end of the story. Let’s turn our attention to finding and designing situations where you’re at a natural advantage.
HOW TO FIND A GAME WHERE THE ODDS ARE IN YOUR FAVOR
Learning to play a game where the odds are in your favor is critical for maintaining motivation and feeling successful. In theory, you can enjoy almost anything. In practice, you are more likely to enjoy the things that come easily to you. People who are talented in a particular area tend to be more competent at that task and are then praised for doing a good job. They stay energized because they are making progress where others have failed, and because they get rewarded with better pay and bigger opportunities, which not only makes them happier but also propels them to produce even higher-quality work. It’s a virtuous cycle.
Pick the right habit and progress is easy. Pick the wrong habit and life is a struggle.
How do you pick the right habit? The first step is something we covered in the 3rd Law: make it easy
. In many cases, when people pick the wrong habit, it simply means they picked a habit that was too difficult. When a habit is easy, you are more likely to be successful. When you are successful, you are more likely to feel satisfied. However, there is another level to consider. In the long-run, if you continue to advance and improve, any area can become challenging. At some point, you need to make sure you’re playing the right game for your skillset. How do you figure that out?
The most common approach is trial and error. Of course, there’s a problem with this strategy: life is short. You don’t have time to try every career, date every eligible bachelor, or play every musical instrument. Thankfully, there is an effective way to manage this conundrum, and it is known as the
explore/exploit trade-off
.
In the beginning of a new activity, there should be a period of exploration. In relationships, it’s called dating. In college, it’s called the liberal arts. In business, it’s called split testing. The goal is to try out many possibilities, research a broad range of ideas, and cast a wide net.
After this initial period of exploration, shift your focus to the best solution you’ve found—but keep experimenting occasionally. The proper balance depends on whether you’re winning or losing. If you are currently winning, you exploit, exploit, exploit. If you are currently losing, you continue to explore, explore, explore.
In the long-run it is probably most effective to work on the strategy that seems to deliver the best results about 80 to 90 percent of the time and keep exploring with the remaining 10 to 20 percent.
Google famously asks employees to spend 80 percent of the workweek on their official job and 20 percent on projects of their choice, which has led to the creation of blockbuster products like AdWords and Gmail.
The optimal approach also depends on how much time you have. If you have a lot of time—like someone at the beginning of their career—it makes more sense to explore because once you find the right thing, you still have a good amount of time to exploit it. If you’re pressed for time—say, as you come up on the deadline for a project—you should implement the best solution you’ve found so far and get some results.
As you explore different options, there are a series of questions you can ask yourself to continually narrow in on the habits and areas that will be most satisfying to you:
What feels like fun to me, but work to others?
The mark of whether you are made for a task is not whether you love it but whether you can handle the pain of the task easier than most people. When are you enjoying yourself while other people are complaining? The work that hurts you less than it hurts others is the work you were made to do.
What makes me lose track of time?
Flow is the mental state you enter when you are so focused on the task at hand that the rest of the world fades away. This blend of happiness and peak performance is what athletes and performers experience when they are “in the zone.” It is nearly impossible to experience a flow state and not find the task satisfying at least to some degree.
Where do I get greater returns than the average person?
We are continually comparing ourselves to those around us, and a behavior is more likely to be satisfying when the comparison is in our favor. When I started writing at jamesclear.com, my email list grew very quickly. I wasn’t quite sure what I was doing well, but I knew that results seemed to be coming faster for me than for some of my colleagues, which motivated me to keep writing.
What comes naturally to me?
For just a moment, ignore what you have been taught. Ignore what society has told you. Ignore what others expect of you. Look inside yourself and ask, “What feels natural to me? When have I felt alive? When have I felt like the real me?” No internal judgments or people-pleasing. No second-guessing or self-criticism. Just feelings of engagement and enjoyment. Whenever you feel authentic and genuine, you are headed in the right direction.
To be honest, some of this process is just luck. Michael Phelps and Hicham El Guerrouj were lucky to be born with a rare set of abilities that are highly valued by society and to be placed in the ideal environment for those abilities. We all have limited time on this planet, and the truly great among us are the ones who not only work hard but also have the good fortune to be exposed to opportunities that favor us.
But what if you don’t want to leave it up to luck?
If you can’t find a game where the odds are stacked in your favor, create one. Scott Adams, the cartoonist behind Dilbert
, says, “
Everyone has at least a few areas in which they could be in the top 25% with some effort. In my case, I can draw better than most people, but I’m hardly an artist. And I’m not any funnier than the average standup comedian who never makes it big, but I’m funnier than most people. The magic is that few people can draw well and write jokes. It’s the combination of the two that makes what I do so rare. And when you add in my business background, suddenly I had a topic that few cartoonists could hope to understand without living it.”
When you can’t win by being better, you can win by being different. By combining your skills, you reduce the level of competition, which makes it easier to stand out. You can shortcut the need for a genetic advantage (or for years of practice) by rewriting the rules. A good player works hard to win the game everyone else is playing. A great
player creates a new game that favors their strengths and avoids their weaknesses.
In college, I designed my own major, biomechanics, which was a combination of physics, chemistry, biology, and anatomy. I wasn’t smart enough to stand out among the top physics or biology majors, so I created my own game. And because it suited me—I was only taking the courses I was interested in—studying felt like less of a chore. It was also easier to avoid the trap of comparing myself to everyone else. After all, nobody else was taking the same combination of classes, so who could say if they were better or worse?
Specialization is a powerful way to overcome the “accident” of bad genetics. The more you master a specific skill, the harder it becomes for others to compete with you. Many bodybuilders are stronger than the average arm wrestler, but even a massive bodybuilder may lose at arm wrestling because the arm wrestling champ has very specific strength. Even if you’re not the most naturally gifted, you can often win by being the best in a very narrow category.
Boiling water will soften a potato but harden an egg. You can’t control whether you’re a potato or an egg, but you can decide to play a game where it’s better to be hard or soft. If you can find a more favorable environment, you can transform the situation from one where the odds are against you to one where they are in your favor.
HOW TO GET THE MOST OUT OF YOUR GENES
Our genes do not eliminate the need for hard work. They clarify it. They tell us what
to work hard on. Once we realize our strengths, we know where to spend our time and energy. We know which types of opportunities to look for and which types of challenges to avoid. The better we understand our nature, the better our strategy can be.
Biological differences matter. Even so, it’s more productive to focus
on whether you are fulfilling your own potential than comparing yourself to someone else. The fact that you have a natural limit to any specific ability has nothing to do with whether you are reaching the ceiling of your capabilities. People get so caught up in the fact that they have
limits that they rarely exert the effort required to get close to them.
Furthermore, genes can’t make you successful if you’re not doing the work. Yes, it’s possible that the ripped trainer at the gym has better genes, but if you haven’t put in the same reps, it’s impossible to say if you have been dealt a better or worse genetic hand. Until you work as hard as those you admire, don’t explain away their success as luck.
In summary, one of the best ways to ensure your habits remain satisfying over the long-run is to pick behaviors that align with your personality and skills. Work hard on the things that come easy.
Chapter Summary
The secret to maximizing your odds of success is to choose the right field of competition.
Pick the right habit and progress is easy. Pick the wrong habit and life is a struggle.
Genes cannot be easily changed, which means they provide a powerful advantage in favorable circumstances and a serious disadvantage in unfavorable circumstances.
Habits are easier when they align with your natural abilities. Choose the habits that best suit you.
Play a game that favors your strengths. If you can’t find a game that favors you, create one.
Genes do not eliminate the need for hard work. They clarify it. They tell us what
to work hard
on.

19
The Goldilocks Rule: How to Stay Motivated in Life and Work
IN 1955
, Disneyland had just opened in Anaheim, California, when a ten-year-old boy walked in and asked for a job. Labor laws were loose back then and the boy managed to land a position selling guidebooks for $0.50 apiece.
Within a year, he had transitioned to Disney’s magic shop, where he learned tricks from the older employees. He experimented with jokes and tried out simple routines on visitors. Soon he discovered that what he loved was not performing magic but performing in general. He set his sights on becoming a comedian.
Beginning in his teenage years, he started performing in little clubs around Los Angeles. The crowds were small and his act was short. He was rarely on stage for more than five minutes. Most of the people in the crowd were too busy drinking or talking with friends to pay attention. One night, he literally delivered his stand-up routine to an empty club.
It wasn’t glamorous work, but there was no doubt he was getting better. His first routines would only last one or two minutes. By high school, his material had expanded to include a five-minute act and, a few years later, a ten-minute show. At nineteen, he was performing weekly for twenty minutes at a time. He had to read three poems during the show just to make the routine long enough, but his skills continued to progress.
He spent another decade experimenting, adjusting, and practicing. He took a job as a television writer and, gradually, he was able to land his own appearances on talk shows. By the mid-1970s, he had worked his way into being a regular guest on The Tonight Show
and Saturday Night Live
.
Finally, after nearly fifteen years of work, the young man rose to fame. He toured sixty cities in sixty-three days. Then seventy-two cities in eighty days. Then eighty-five cities in ninety days. He had 18,695 people attend one show in Ohio. Another 45,000 tickets were sold for his three-day show in New York. He catapulted to the top of his genre and became one of the
most successful comedians of his time.
His name is Steve Martin.
Martin’s story offers a fascinating perspective on what it takes to stick with habits for the long run. Comedy is not for the timid. It is hard to imagine a situation that would strike fear into the hearts of more people than performing alone on stage and failing to get a single laugh. And yet Steve Martin faced this fear every week for eighteen years. In his words, “10 years spent learning, 4 years spent refining, and
4 years as a wild success.”
Why is it that some people, like Martin, stick with their habits—whether practicing jokes or drawing cartoons or playing guitar—while most of us struggle to stay motivated? How do we design habits that pull us in rather than ones that fade away? Scientists have been
studying this question for many years. While there is still much to learn, one of the most consistent findings is that the way to maintain motivation and achieve peak levels of desire is to work on tasks of “
just manageable difficulty.”
The human brain loves a challenge, but only if it is within an optimal zone of difficulty. If you love tennis and try to play a serious match against a four-year-old, you will quickly become bored. It’s too easy. You’ll win every point. In contrast, if you play a professional tennis player like Roger Federer or Serena Williams, you will quickly lose motivation because the match is too difficult.
Now consider playing tennis against someone who is your equal. As the game progresses, you win a few points and you lose a few. You have a good chance of winning, but only if you really try. Your focus narrows, distractions fade away, and you find yourself fully invested in the task at hand. This is a challenge of just manageable difficulty and it is a prime example of the Goldilocks Rule
.
The Goldilocks Rule states that humans experience peak motivation when working on tasks that are right on the edge of their current abilities. Not too hard. Not too easy. Just right.
THE GOLDILOCKS RULE
FIGURE 15:
Maximum motivation occurs when facing a challenge of just manageable difficulty.
In psychology research this is known as the Yerkes–Dodson law, which describes the optimal level of arousal as the midpoint between boredom and anxiety.
Martin’s comedy career is an excellent example of the Goldilocks Rule in practice. Each year, he expanded his comedy routine—but only by a minute or two. He was always adding new material, but he also kept a few jokes that were guaranteed to get laughs. There were just enough victories to keep him motivated and just enough mistakes to keep him working hard.
When you’re starting a new habit, it’s important to keep the behavior as easy as possible so you can stick with it even when conditions aren’t perfect. This is an idea we covered in detail while discussing the 3rd Law of Behavior Change.
Once a habit has been established, however, it’s important to continue to advance in small ways. These little improvements and new
challenges keep you engaged. And if you hit the Goldilocks Zone just right, you can achieve a flow state
.
*
A flow state is the experience of being “in the zone” and fully immersed in an activity. Scientists have tried to quantify this feeling. They found that to achieve a state of flow, a task must be roughly
4 percent beyond your current ability. In real life it’s typically not feasible to quantify the difficulty of an action in this way, but the core idea of the Goldilocks Rule remains: working on challenges of just manageable difficulty—something on the perimeter of your ability—seems crucial for maintaining motivation.
Improvement requires a delicate balance. You need to regularly search for challenges that push you to your edge while continuing to make enough progress to stay motivated. Behaviors need to remain novel in order for them to stay attractive and satisfying. Without variety, we get bored. And boredom is perhaps the greatest villain on the quest for self-improvement.
HOW TO STAY FOCUSED WHEN YOU GET BORED WORKING ON YOUR GOALS
After my baseball career ended, I was looking for a new sport. I joined a weightlifting team and one day an elite coach visited our gym. He had worked with thousands of athletes during his long career, including a few Olympians. I introduced myself and we began talking about the process of improvement.
“What’s the difference between the best athletes and everyone else?” I asked. “What do the really successful people do that most don’t?”
He mentioned the factors you might expect: genetics, luck, talent. But then he said something I wasn’t expecting: “At some point it comes down to who can handle the boredom of training every day, doing the same lifts over and over and over.”
His answer surprised me because it’s a different way of thinking
about work ethic. People talk about getting “amped up” to work on their goals. Whether it’s business or sports or art, you hear people say things like, “It all comes down to passion.” Or, “You have to really want it.” As a result, many of us get depressed when we lose focus or motivation because we think that successful people have some bottomless reserve of passion. But this coach was saying that really successful people feel
the same lack of motivation as everyone else. The difference is that they still find a way to show up despite the feelings of boredom.
Mastery requires practice. But the more you practice something, the more boring and routine it becomes. Once the beginner gains have been made and we learn what to expect, our interest starts to fade. Sometimes it happens even faster than that. All you have to do is hit the gym a few days in a row or publish a couple of blog posts on time and letting one day slip doesn’t feel like much. Things are going well. It’s easy to rationalize taking a day off because you’re in a good place.
The greatest threat to success is not failure but boredom. We get bored with habits because they stop delighting us. The outcome becomes expected. And as our habits become ordinary, we start derailing our progress to seek novelty. Perhaps this is why we get caught up in a never-ending cycle, jumping from one workout to the next, one diet to the next, one business idea to the next. As soon as we experience the slightest dip in motivation, we begin seeking a new strategy—even if the old one was still working. As Machiavelli noted, “
Men desire novelty to such an extent that those who are doing well wish for a change as much as those who are doing badly.”
Perhaps this is why many of the most habit-forming products are those that provide continuous forms of novelty. Video games provide visual novelty. Porn provides sexual novelty. Junk foods provide culinary novelty. Each of these experiences offer continual elements of surprise.
In psychology, this is known as a
variable reward
.
*
Slot machines are the most common real-world example. A gambler hits the jackpot every now and then but not at any predictable interval. The pace of rewards varies.
This variance leads to the greatest spike of dopamine, enhances memory recall, and accelerates habit formation.
Variable rewards won’t create
a craving—that is, you can’t take a reward people are uninterested in, give it to them at a variable interval, and hope it will change their mind—but they are a powerful way to amplify the cravings we already experience because they reduce boredom.
The sweet spot of desire occurs at a 50/50 split between success and failure. Half of the time you get what you want. Half of the time you don’t. You need just enough “winning” to experience satisfaction and just enough “wanting” to experience desire. This is one of the benefits of following the Goldilocks Rule. If you’re already interested in a habit, working on challenges of just manageable difficulty is a good way to keep things interesting.
Of course, not all habits have a variable reward component, and you wouldn’t want them to. If Google only delivered a useful search result some of the time, I would switch to a competitor pretty quickly. If Uber only picked up half of my trips, I doubt I’d be using that service much longer. And if I flossed my teeth each night and only sometimes ended up with a clean mouth, I think I’d skip it.
Variable rewards or not, no habit will stay interesting forever. At some point, everyone faces the same challenge on the journey of self-improvement: you have to fall in love with boredom.
We all have goals that we would like to achieve and dreams that we
would like to fulfill, but it doesn’t matter what you are trying to become better at, if you only do the work when it’s convenient or exciting, then you’ll never be consistent enough to achieve remarkable results.
I can guarantee that if you manage to start a habit and keep sticking to it, there will be days when you feel like quitting. When you start a business, there will be days when you don’t feel like showing up. When you’re at the gym, there will be sets that you don’t feel like finishing. When it’s time to write, there will be days that you don’t feel like typing. But stepping up when it’s annoying or painful or draining to do so, that’s what makes the difference between a professional and an amateur.
Professionals stick to the schedule; amateurs let life get in the way. Professionals know what is important to them and work toward it with purpose; amateurs get pulled off course by the urgencies of life.
David Cain, an author and meditation teacher, encourages his students to avoid being “fair-weather meditators.” Similarly, you don’t want to be a fair-weather athlete or a fair-weather writer or a fair-weather anything. When a habit is truly important to you, you have to be willing to stick to it in any mood. Professionals take action even when the mood isn’t right. They might not enjoy it, but they find a way to put the reps in.
There have been a lot of sets that I haven’t felt like finishing, but I’ve never regretted doing the workout. There have been a lot of articles I haven’t felt like writing, but I’ve never regretted publishing on schedule. There have been a lot of days I’ve felt like relaxing, but I’ve never regretted showing up and working on something that was important to me.
The only way to become excellent is to be endlessly fascinated by doing the same thing over and over. You have to fall in love with boredom.
Chapter Summary
The Goldilocks Rule states that humans experience peak motivation when working on tasks that are right on the edge of their current abilities.
The greatest threat to success is not failure but boredom.
As habits become routine, they become less interesting and less satisfying. We get bored.
Anyone can work hard when they feel motivated. It’s the ability to keep going when work isn’t exciting that makes the difference.
Professionals stick to the schedule; amateurs let life get in the
way.

20
The Downside of Creating Good Habits
HABITS CREAT
E
THE
FOUNDATION
FOR
MASTERY.
In chess, it is only after the basic movements of the pieces have become automatic that a player can focus on the next level of the game. Each chunk of information that is memorized opens up the mental space for more effortful thinking. This is true for any endeavor. When you know the simple movements so well that you can perform them without thinking, you are free to pay attention to more advanced details. In this way, habits are the backbone of any pursuit of excellence.
However, the benefits of habits come at a cost. At first, each repetition develops fluency, speed, and skill. But then, as a habit becomes automatic, you become less sensitive to feedback. You fall into mindless repetition. It becomes easier to let mistakes slide. When you can do it “good enough” on autopilot, you stop thinking about how to do it better.
The upside of habits is that we can do things without thinking. The downside of habits is that you get used to doing things a certain way and stop paying attention to little errors. You assume you’re getting better because you’re gaining experience. In reality, you are merely
reinforcing your current habits—not improving them. In fact, some research has shown that once a skill has been mastered
there is usually a slight decline
in performance over time.
Usually, this minor dip in performance is no cause for worry. You don’t need a system to continuously improve how well you brush your teeth or tie your shoes or make your morning cup of tea. With habits like these, good enough is usually good enough. The less energy you spend on trivial choices, the more you can spend it on what really matters.
However, when you want to maximize your potential and achieve elite levels of performance, you need a more nuanced approach. You can’t repeat the same things blindly and expect to become exceptional. Habits are necessary, but not sufficient for mastery. What you need is a combination of automatic habits and deliberate practice.
Habits + Deliberate Practice = Mastery
To become great, certain skills do
need to become automatic. Basketball players need to be able to dribble without thinking before they can move on to mastering layups with their nondominant hand. Surgeons need to repeat the first incision so many times that they could do it with their eyes closed, so that they can focus on the hundreds of variables that arise during surgery. But after one habit has been mastered, you have to return to the effortful part of the work and begin building the next habit.
Mastery is the process of narrowing your focus to a tiny element of success, repeating it until you have internalized the skill, and then using this new habit as the foundation to advance to the next frontier of your development. Old tasks become easier the second time around, but it doesn’t get easier overall because now you’re pouring your energy into the next challenge. Each habit unlocks the next level of performance. It’s an endless cycle.
MASTERING ONE HABIT
MASTERING A FIELD
FIGURE 16:
The process of mastery requires that you progressively layer improvements on top of one another, each habit building upon the last until a new level of performance has been reached and a higher range of skills has been internalized.
Although habits are powerful, what you need is a way to remain conscious of your performance over time, so you can continue to
refine and improve. It is precisely at the moment when you begin to feel like you have mastered a skill—right when things are starting to feel automatic and you are becoming comfortable—that you must avoid slipping into the trap of complacency.
The solution? Establish a system for reflection and review.
HOW TO REVIEW YOUR HABITS AND MAKE ADJUSTMENTS
In 1986, the Los Angeles Lakers had one of the most talented basketball teams ever assembled, but they are rarely remembered that way. The team started the 1985–1986 NBA season with an astounding 29–5 record. “
The pundits were saying that we might be the best team in the history of basketball,” head coach Pat Riley said after the season. Surprisingly, the Lakers stumbled in the 1986 playoffs and suffered a season-ending defeat in the Western Conference Finals. The “best team in the history of basketball” didn’t even play for the NBA championship.
After that blow, Riley was tired of hearing about how much talent his players had and about how much promise his team held. He didn’t want to see flashes of brilliance followed by a gradual fade in performance. He wanted the Lakers to play up to their potential, night after night. In the summer of 1986, he created a plan to do exactly that,
a system that he called the Career Best Effort program or CBE.
“When players first join the Lakers,” Riley explained, “we track their basketball statistics all the way back to high school. I call this Taking Their Number. We look for an accurate gauge of what a player can do, then build him into our plan for the team, based on the notion that he will maintain and then improve upon his averages.”
After determining a player’s baseline level of performance, Riley added a key step. He asked each player to “improve their output by at
least 1 percent over the course of the season.
If they succeeded, it would be a CBE, or Career Best Effort.” Similar to the British Cycling team that we discussed in Chapter 1, the Lakers sought peak performance by getting slightly better each day.
Riley was careful to point out that CBE was not merely about points or statistics but about giving your “best effort spiritually and mentally and physically.” Players got credit for “allowing an opponent to run into you when you know that a foul will be called against him, diving for loose balls, going after rebounds whether you are likely to get them or not, helping a teammate when the player he’s guarding has surged past him, and other ‘unsung hero’ deeds.”
As an example, let’s say that Magic Johnson—the Lakers star player at the time—had 11 points, 8 rebounds, 12 assists, 2 steals, and 5 turnovers in a game. Magic also got credit for an “unsung hero” deed by diving after a loose ball (+1). Finally, he played a total of 33 minutes in this imaginary game.
The positive numbers (11 + 8 + 12 + 2 + 1) add up to 34. Then, we subtract the 5 turnovers (34–5) to get 29. Finally, we divide 29 by 33 minutes played.
29/33 = 0.879
Magic’s CBE number here would be 879. This number was calculated for all of a player’s games, and it was the average CBE that a player was asked to improve by 1 percent over the season. Riley compared each player’s current CBE to not only their past performances but also those of other players in the league. As Riley put it, “We rank team members alongside league opponents who play the same position and have similar role definitions.”
Sportswriter Jackie MacMullan noted, “Riley trumpeted the top performers in the league in bold lettering on the blackboard each week
and measured them against the corresponding players on his own roster. Solid, reliable players generally rated a score in the 600s, while elite players scored at least 800. Magic Johnson, who submitted 138 triple-doubles in his career, often scored over 1,000.”
The Lakers also emphasized year-over-year progress by making historical comparisons of CBE data. Riley said, “We stacked the month of November 1986, next to November 1985, and showed the players whether they were doing better or worse than at the same point last season. Then we showed them how their performance figures for December 1986, stacked up against November’s.”
The Lakers rolled out CBE in October 1986. Eight months later, they were NBA champions. The following year, Pat Riley led his team to another title as the Lakers became the first team in twenty years to win back-to-back NBA championships. Afterward, he said, “
Sustaining an effort is the most important thing for any enterprise. The way to be successful is to learn how to do things right, then do them the same way every time.”
The CBE program is a prime example of the power of reflection and review. The Lakers were already talented. CBE helped them get the most out of what they had, and made sure their habits improved rather than declined.
Reflection and review enables the long-term improvement of all habits because it makes you aware of your mistakes and helps you consider possible paths for improvement. Without reflection, we can make excuses, create rationalizations, and lie to ourselves. We have no process for determining whether we are performing better or worse compared to yesterday.
Top performers in all fields engage in various types of reflection and review, and the process doesn’t have to be complex. Kenyan runner
Eliud Kipchoge is one of the greatest marathoners of all time and an Olympic gold medalist. He still takes notes after every practice in
which he reviews his training for the day and searches for areas that can be improved. Similarly, gold medal swimmer Katie Ledecky records her wellness on a scale of 1 to 10 and includes notes on her nutrition and how well she slept. She also records the times posted by other swimmers. At the end of each week,
her coach goes over her notes and adds his thoughts.
It’s not just athletes, either.
When comedian Chris Rock is preparing fresh material, he will first appear at small nightclubs dozens of times and test hundreds of jokes. He brings a notepad on stage and records which bits go over well and where he needs to make adjustments. The few killer lines that survive will form the backbone of his new show.
I know of executives and investors who keep a “decision journal” in which they record the major decisions they make each week, why they made them, and what they expect the outcome to be. They review their choices at the end of each month or year to see where they were correct and where they went wrong.
*
Improvement is not just about learning habits, it’s also about fine-tuning them. Reflection and review ensures that you spend your time on the right things and make course corrections whenever necessary—like Pat Riley adjusting the effort of his players on a nightly basis. You don’t want to keep practicing a habit if it becomes ineffective.
Personally, I employ two primary modes of reflection and review. Each December, I perform an
Annual Review
, in which I reflect on the previous year. I tally my habits for the year by counting up how many articles I published, how many workouts I put in, how many new places I visited, and more.
*
Then, I reflect on my progress (or lack thereof) by answering three questions:
What went well this year?
What didn’t go so well this year?
What did I learn?
Six months later, when summer rolls around, I conduct an Integrity Report
. Like everyone, I make a lot of mistakes. My Integrity Report helps me realize where I went wrong and motivates me to get back on course. I use it as a time to revisit my core values and consider whether I have been living in accordance with them. This is when I reflect on my identity and how I can work toward being the type of person I wish to become.
*
My yearly Integrity Report answers three questions:
What are the core values that drive my life and work?
How am I living and working with integrity right now?
How can I set a higher standard in the future?
These two reports don’t take very long—just a few hours per year—but they are crucial periods of refinement. They prevent the gradual slide that happens when I don’t pay close attention. They provide an annual reminder to revisit my desired identity and consider how my habits are helping me become the type of person I wish to be. They indicate when I should upgrade my habits and take on new challenges and when I should dial my efforts back and focus on the fundamentals.
Reflection can also bring a sense of perspective. Daily habits are powerful because of how they compound, but worrying too much about every daily choice is like looking at yourself in the mirror from an inch away. You can see every imperfection and lose sight of the
bigger picture. There is too much feedback. Conversely, never reviewing your habits is like never looking in the mirror. You aren’t aware of easily fixable flaws—a spot on your shirt, a bit of food in your teeth. There is too little feedback. Periodic reflection and review is like viewing yourself in the mirror from a conversational distance. You can see the important changes you should make without losing sight of the bigger picture. You want to view the entire mountain range, not obsess over each peak and valley.
Finally, reflection and review offers an ideal time to revisit one of the most important aspects of behavior change: identity.
HOW TO BREAK THE BELIEFS THAT HOLD YOU BACK
In the beginning, repeating a habit is essential to build up evidence of your desired identity. As you latch on to that new identity, however, those same beliefs can hold you back from the next level of growth. When working against you, your identity creates a kind of “pride” that encourages you to deny your weak spots and prevents you from truly growing. This is one of the greatest downsides of building habits.
The more sacred an idea is to us—that is, the more deeply it is tied to our identity—the more strongly we will defend it against criticism. You see this in every industry. The schoolteacher who ignores innovative teaching methods and sticks with her tried-and-true lesson plans. The veteran manager who is committed to doing things “his way.” The surgeon who dismisses the ideas of her younger colleagues. The band who produces a mind-blowing first album and then gets stuck in a rut. The tighter we cling to an identity, the harder it becomes to grow beyond it.
One solution is to avoid making any single aspect of your identity an overwhelming portion of who you are. In the words of investor Paul
Graham, “
keep your identity small.” The more you let a single belief define you, the less capable you are of adapting when life challenges you. If you tie everything up in being the point guard or the partner at the firm or whatever else, then the loss of that facet of your life will wreck you. If you’re a vegan and then develop a health condition that forces you to change your diet, you’ll have an identity crisis on your hands. When you cling too tightly to one identity, you become brittle. Lose that one thing and you lose yourself.
For most of my young life, being an athlete was a major part of my identity. After my baseball career ended, I struggled to find myself. When you spend your whole life defining yourself in one way and that disappears, who are you now?
Military veterans and former entrepreneurs report similar feelings. If your identity is wrapped up in a belief like “I’m a great soldier,” what happens when your period of service ends? For many business owners, their identity is something along the lines of “I’m the CEO” or “I’m the founder.” If you have spent every waking moment working on your business, how will you feel after you sell the company?
The key to mitigating these losses of identity is to redefine yourself such that you get to keep important aspects of your identity even if your particular role changes.
“I’m an athlete” becomes “I’m the type of person who is mentally tough and loves a physical challenge.”
“I’m a great soldier” transforms into “I’m the type of person who is disciplined, reliable, and great on a team.”
“I’m the CEO” translates to “I’m the type of person who builds and creates things.”
When chosen effectively, an identity can be flexible rather than
brittle. Like water flowing around an obstacle, your identity works with the changing circumstances rather than against them.
The following quote from the Tao Te Ching
encapsulates the ideas perfectly:
Men are born soft and supple;
dead, they are stiff and hard.
Plants are born tender and pliant;
dead, they are brittle and dry.
Thus whoever is stiff and inflexible
is a disciple of death.
Whoever is soft and yielding
is a disciple of life.
The hard and stiff will be broken.
The soft and supple will prevail.
—LAO
TZU
Habits deliver numerous benefits, but the downside is that they can lock us into our previous patterns of thinking and acting—even when the world is shifting around us. Everything is impermanent. Life is constantly changing, so you need to periodically check in to see if your old habits and beliefs are still serving you.
A lack of self-awareness is poison. Reflection and review is the antidote.
Chapter Summary
The upside of habits is that we can do things without thinking. The downside is that we stop paying attention to little errors.
Habits + Deliberate Practice = Mastery
Reflection and review is a process that allows you to remain conscious of your performance over time.
The tighter we cling to an identity, the harder it becomes to grow beyond it.

Conclusion
The Secret to Results That Last
THERE IS AN
ancient Greek parable known as the Sorites Paradox,
*
which talks about the effect one small action can have when repeated enough times. One formulation of the paradox goes as follows: Can one coin make a person rich? If you give a person a pile of ten coins, you wouldn’t claim that he or she is rich. But what if you add another? And another? And another? At some point, you will have to admit that
no one can be rich unless one coin can make him or her so.
We can say the same about atomic habits. Can one tiny change transform your life? It’s unlikely you would say so. But what if you made another? And another? And another? At some point, you will have to admit that your life was transformed by one small change.
The holy grail of habit change is not a single 1 percent improvement, but a thousand of them. It’s a bunch of atomic habits stacking up, each one a fundamental unit of the overall system.
In the beginning, small improvements can often seem meaningless because they get washed away by the weight of the system. Just as one
coin won’t make you rich, one positive change like meditating for one minute or reading one page each day is unlikely to deliver a noticeable difference.
Gradually, though, as you continue to layer small changes on top of one another, the scales of life start to move. Each improvement is like adding a grain of sand to the positive side of the scale, slowly tilting things in your favor. Eventually, if you stick with it, you hit a tipping point. Suddenly, it feels easier to stick with good habits. The weight of the system is working for you rather than against you.
Over the course of this book, we’ve looked at dozens of stories about top performers. We’ve heard about Olympic gold medalists, award-winning artists, business leaders, lifesaving physicians, and star comedians who have all used the science of small habits to master their craft and vault to the top of their field. Each of the people, teams, and companies we have covered has faced different circumstances, but ultimately progressed in the same way: through a commitment to tiny, sustainable, unrelenting improvements.
Success is not a goal to reach or a finish line to cross. It is a system to improve, an endless process to refine. In Chapter 1, I said, “If you’re having trouble changing your habits, the problem isn’t you. The problem is your system. Bad habits repeat themselves again and again not because you don’t want to change, but because you have the wrong system for change.”
As this book draws to a close, I hope the opposite is true. With the Four Laws of Behavior Change, you have a set of tools and strategies that you can use to build better systems and shape better habits. Sometimes a habit will be hard to remember and you’ll need to make it obvious
. Other times you won’t feel like starting and you’ll need to make it attractive
. In many cases, you may find that a habit will be too difficult and you’ll need to make it easy
. And sometimes, you won’t feel like sticking with it and you’ll need to make it satisfying
.
Behaviors are effortless here.
Behaviors are difficult here.
Obvious
Invisible
Attractive
Unattractive
Easy
Hard
Satisfying
Unsatisfying
You want to push your good habits toward the left side of the spectrum by making them obvious, attractive, easy, and satisfying. Meanwhile, you want to cluster your bad habits toward the right side by making them invisible, unattractive, hard, and unsatisfying.
This is a continuous process. There is no finish line. There is no permanent solution. Whenever you’re looking to improve, you can rotate through the Four Laws of Behavior Change until you find the next bottleneck. Make it obvious. Make it attractive. Make it easy. Make it satisfying.
Round and round. Always looking for the next way to get 1 percent better.
The secret to getting results that last is to never stop making improvements. It’s remarkable what you can build if you just don’t stop. It’s remarkable the business you can build if you don’t stop working. It’s remarkable the body you can build if you don’t stop training. It’s remarkable the knowledge you can build if you don’t stop learning. It’s remarkable the fortune you can build if you don’t stop saving. It’s remarkable the friendships you can build if you don’t stop caring. Small habits don’t add up. They compound.
That’s the power of atomic habits. Tiny changes. Remarkable
results.

Appendix

What Should You Read Next?
THANK YOU SO
much for taking the time to read this book. It has been a pleasure sharing my work with you. If you are looking for something to read next, allow me to offer a suggestion.
If you enjoyed Atomic Habits
, then you may like my other writing as well. My latest articles are sent out in my free weekly newsletter. Subscribers are also the first to hear about my newest books and projects. Finally, in addition to my own work, each year I send out a reading list of my favorite books from other authors on a wide range of subjects.
You can sign up at:
jamesclear.com/newsletter

Little Lessons from the Four Laws
IN THIS BOOK
, I have introduced a four-step model for human behavior: cue, craving, response, reward. This framework not only teaches us how to create new habits but also reveals some interesting insights about human behavior.
Problem phase
1. Cue
2. Craving
Solution phase
3. Response
4. Reward
In this section, I have compiled some lessons (and a few bits of common sense) that are confirmed by the model. The purpose of these examples is to clarify just how useful and wide-ranging this framework is when describing human behavior. Once you understand the model, you’ll see examples of it everywhere.
Awareness comes before desire.
A craving is created when you assign meaning to a cue. Your brain constructs an emotion or feeling to describe your current situation, and that means a craving can only occur after you have noticed an opportunity.
Happiness is simply the absence of desire.
When you observe a
cue, but do not desire to change your state, you are content with the current situation. Happiness is not about the achievement of pleasure (which is joy or satisfaction), but about the lack of desire. It arrives when you have no urge to feel differently. Happiness is the state you enter when you no longer want to change your state.
However, happiness is fleeting because a new desire always comes along. As Caed Budris says, “
Happiness is the space between one desire being fulfilled and a new desire forming.” Likewise, suffering is the space between craving a change in state and getting it.
It is the
idea
of pleasure that we chase.
We seek the image of pleasure that we generate in our minds. At the time of action, we do not know what it will be like to attain that image (or even if it will satisfy us). The feeling of satisfaction only comes afterward. This is what the Austrian neurologist Victor Frankl meant when he said that
happiness cannot be pursued, it must ensue. Desire is pursued. Pleasure ensues from action.
Peace occurs when you don’t turn your observations into problems.
The first step in any behavior is observation. You notice a cue, a bit of information, an event. If you do not desire to act on what you observe, then you are at peace.
Craving is about wanting to fix everything. Observation without craving is the realization that you do not need to fix anything. Your desires are not running rampant. You do not crave a change in state. Your mind does not generate a problem for you to solve. You’re simply observing and existing.
With a big enough
why
you can overcome any
how
.
Friedrich Nietzsche, the German philosopher and poet, famously wrote, “
He who has a why to live for can bear almost any how.” This phrase harbors an important truth about human behavior. If your motivation and desire are great enough (that is, why
are you are acting), you’ll take action
even when it is quite difficult. Great craving can power great action—even when friction is high.
Being curious is better than being smart.
Being motivated and curious counts for more than being smart because it leads to action. Being smart will never deliver results on its own because it doesn’t get you to act. It is desire, not intelligence, that prompts behavior. As Naval Ravikant says, “The trick to doing anything is first cultivating a desire for it.”
Emotions drive behavior.
Every decision is an emotional decision at some level. Whatever your logical reasons are for taking action, you only feel compelled to act on them because of emotion. In fact, people with damage to emotional centers of the brain can list many reasons for taking action but still will not act because they do not have emotions to drive them. This is why craving comes before
response. The feeling comes first, and then the behavior.
We can only be rational and logical
after
we have been emotional.
The primary mode of the brain is to feel; the secondary mode is to think. Our first response—the fast, nonconscious portion of the brain—is optimized for feeling and anticipating. Our second response—the slow, conscious portion of the brain—is the part that does the “thinking.”
Psychologists refer to this as System 1 (feelings and rapid judgments) versus System 2 (rational analysis).
The feeling comes first (System 1); the rationality only intervenes later (System 2). This works great when the two are aligned, but it results in illogical and emotional thinking when they are not.
Your response tends to follow your emotions.
Our thoughts and actions are rooted in what we find attractive, not necessarily in what is logical. Two people can notice the same set of facts and respond very differently because they run those facts through their unique emotional filter. This is one reason why
appealing to emotion is typically
more powerful than appealing to reason. If a topic makes someone feel emotional, they will rarely be interested in the data. This is why emotions can be such a threat to wise decision making.
Put another way: most people believe that the reasonable response is the one that benefits them: the one that satisfies their desires. To approach a situation from a more neutral emotional position allows you to base your response on the data rather than the emotion.
Suffering drives progress.
The source of all suffering is the desire for a change in state. This is also the source of all progress. The desire to change your state is what powers you to take action. It is wanting more that pushes humanity to seek improvements, develop new technologies, and reach for a higher level. With craving, we are dissatisfied but driven. Without craving, we are satisfied but lack ambition.
Your actions reveal how badly you want something.
If you keep saying something is a priority but you never act on it, then you don’t really want it. It’s time to have an honest conversation with yourself. Your actions reveal your true motivations.
Reward is on the other side of sacrifice.
Response (sacrifice of energy) always precedes reward (the collection of resources). The “runner’s high” only comes after the hard run. The reward only comes after the energy is spent.
Self-control is difficult because it is not satisfying.
A reward is an outcome that satisfies your craving. This makes self-control ineffective because inhibiting our desires does not usually resolve them. Resisting temptation does not satisfy your craving; it just ignores it. It creates space for the craving to pass. Self-control requires you to release a desire rather than satisfy it.
Our expectations determine our satisfaction.
The gap between our cravings and our rewards determines how satisfied we feel after taking action. If the mismatch between expectations and outcomes is positive (surprise and delight), then we are more likely to repeat a
behavior in the future. If the mismatch is negative (disappointment and frustration), then we are less likely to do so.
For example, if you expect to get $10 and get $100, you feel great. If you expect to get $100 and get $10, you feel disappointed. Your expectation changes your satisfaction. An average experience preceded by high expectations is a disappointment. An average experience preceded by low expectations is a delight. When liking and wanting are approximately the same, you feel satisfied.
Satisfaction = Liking – Wanting
This is the wisdom behind Seneca’s famous quote, “
Being poor is not having too little, it is wanting more.” If your wants outpace your likes, you’ll always be unsatisfied. You’re perpetually putting more weight on the problem than the solution.
Happiness is relative. When I first began sharing my writing publicly it took me three months to get one thousand subscribers. When I hit that milestone, I told my parents and my girlfriend. We celebrated. I felt excited and motivated. A few years later, I realized that one thousand people were signing up each day. And yet I didn’t even think to tell anyone. It felt normal. I was getting results ninety times faster than before but experiencing little pleasure over it. It wasn’t until a few days later that I realized how absurd it was that I wasn’t celebrating something that would have seemed like a pipe dream just a few years before.
The pain of failure correlates to the height of expectation.
When desire is high, it hurts to not like
the outcome. Failing to attain something you want hurts more than failing to attain something you didn’t think much about in the first place. This is why people say, “I don’t want to get my hopes up.”
Feelings come both before and after the behavior.
Before acting, there is a feeling that motivates you to act—the craving. After acting,
there is a feeling that teaches you to repeat the action in the future—the reward.
Cue > Craving (Feeling) > Response > Reward (Feeling)
How we feel influences how we act, and how we act influences how we feel.
Desire initiates. Pleasure sustains.
Wanting and liking are the two drivers of behavior. If it’s not desirable, you have no reason to do it. Desire and craving are what initiate a behavior. But if it’s not enjoyable, you have no reason to repeat it. Pleasure and satisfaction are what sustain a behavior. Feeling motivated gets you to act. Feeling successful gets you to repeat.
Hope declines with experience and is replaced by acceptance.
The first time an opportunity arises, there is hope of what could be. Your expectation (cravings) is based solely on promise
. The second time around, your expectation is grounded in reality. You begin to understand how the process works and your hope is gradually traded for a more accurate prediction and acceptance of the likely outcome.
This is one reason why we continually grasp for the latest get-rich-quick or weight-loss scheme. New plans offer hope because we don’t have any experiences to ground our expectations. New strategies seem more appealing than old ones because they can have unbounded hope.
As Aristotle noted, “Youth is easily deceived because it is quick to hope.” Perhaps this can be revised to “Youth is easily deceived because it only hopes.” There is no experience to root the expectation in. In the beginning, hope is all you have.

How to Apply These Ideas to Business
OVER THE YEARS
, I’ve spoken at Fortune 500 companies and growing start-ups about how to apply the science of small habits to run more effective businesses and build better products. I’ve compiled many of the most practical strategies into a short bonus chapter. I think you’ll find it to be an incredibly useful addition to the main ideas mentioned in Atomic Habits
.
You can download this chapter at: atomichabits.com/
business

How to Apply These Ideas to Parenting
ONE OF THE
most common questions I hear from readers is something along the lines of, “How can I get my kids to do this stuff?” The ideas in Atomic Habits
are intended to apply broadly to all of human behavior (teenagers are humans, too), which means you should find plenty of useful strategies in the main text. That said, parenting does face its own set of challenges. As a bonus chapter, I’ve put together a brief guide on how to apply these ideas specifically to parenting.
You can download this chapter at: atomichabits.com/
parenting

Acknowledgments
I HAVE RELIED HEAVILY
on others during the creation of this book. Before anyone else, I must thank my wife, Kristy, who has been indispensable throughout this process. She has played every role a person can play in the writing of a book: spouse, friend, fan, critic, editor, researcher, therapist. It is no exaggeration to say this book would not be the same without her. It might not exist at all. Like everything in our life, we did it together.
Second, I am grateful to my family, not only for their support and encouragement on this book but also for believing in me no matter what project I happen to be working on. I have benefited from many years of support from my parents, grandparents, and siblings. In particular, I want my mom and dad to know that I love them. It is a special feeling to know that your parents are your greatest fans.
Third, to my assistant, Lyndsey Nuckols. At this point, her job defies description as she has been asked to do nearly everything one could imagine for a small business. Thankfully, her skills and talents are more powerful than my questionable management style. Some sections of this book are as much hers as they are mine. I am deeply grateful for her help.
As for the content and writing of the book, I have a long list of people to thank. To start, there are a few people from whom I have learned so much that it would be a crime to not mention them by name. Leo Babauta, Charles Duhigg, Nir Eyal, and BJ Fogg have each influenced my thoughts on habits in meaningful ways. Their work and ideas can be found sprinkled throughout this text. If you enjoyed this book, I’d encourage you to read their writing as well.
At various stages of writing, I benefited from the guidance of many fine editors. Thanks to Peter Guzzardi for walking me through the early stages of the writing process and for a kick in the pants when I really needed it. I am indebted to Blake Atwood and Robin Dellabough for transforming my ugly and insanely long first drafts into a tight, readable manuscript. And I am thankful to Anne Barngrover for her ability to add a little class and poetic style to my writing.
I’d like to thank the many people who read early versions of the manuscript, including Bruce Ammons, Darcey Ansell, Tim Ballard, Vishal Bhardwaj, Charlotte Blank, Jerome Burt, Sim Campbell, Al Carlos, Nicky Case, Julie Chang, Jason Collins, Debra Croy, Roger Dooley, Tiago Forte, Matt Gartland, Andrew Gierer, Randy Giffen, Jon Giganti, Adam Gilbert, Stephan Guyenet, Jeremy Hendon, Jane Horvath, Joakim Jansson, Josh Kaufman, Anne Kavanagh, Chris Klaus, Zeke Lopez, Cady Macon, Cyd Madsen, Kiera McGrath, Amy Mitchell, Anna Moise, Stacey Morris, Tara-Nicholle Nelson, Taylor Pearson, Max Shank, Trey Shelton, Jason Shen, Jacob Zangelidis, and Ari Zelmanow. The book benefited greatly from your feedback.
To the team at Avery and Penguin Random House who made this book a reality, thank you. I owe a debt of special thanks to my publisher, Megan Newman, for her endless patience as I continually pushed back deadlines. She gave me the space I needed to create a book I was proud of and championed my ideas at every step. To Nina, for her ability to transform my writing while still retaining my original message. To
Lindsay, Farin, Casey, and the rest of the PRH team for spreading the message of this book to more people than I could ever reach on my own. To Pete Garceau, for designing a beautiful cover for this book.
And to my agent, Lisa DiMona, for her guidance and insight at every step of the publishing process.
To the many friends and family members who asked “How’s the book going?” and offered a word of encouragement when I inevitably replied “Slowly”—thank you. Every author faces a few dark moments when writing a book, and one kind word can be enough to get you to show up again the next day.
I am sure there are people I have forgotten, but I keep an updated list of anyone who has influenced my thinking in meaningful ways at jamesclear.com/thanks
.